5.                        UNRESOLVED MYSTERIES


5.1 Kherab's third quest and the reward

When you've done the first two quests for Kherab, the dwarven artificer in Darkforge, he 
tells you to "be patient, more will have to be done soon". However, he will never assign 
the third quest, even to experience level 50 characters who are ready to close the chaos 
gate or attempt an ultra ending. From scanning the executable, reference to a "spear of 
raw steel" has been found, seemingly a third quest reward along with the amulet of raw 
steel and shield of raw steel now available.

5.2 The Scroll of Omnipotence

In the secret compartment of the High Mountain Village, there's a message that reads:

"Dear Lubaf, I am sorry to disappoint you but you won't be able to find the Scroll of 
Omnipotence in this place. I have hidden it more effectively. You will need to find the 
red rooster at dawn. Then you'll encounter the final challenge. 

With passionate hate,
Alhacrast, Overlord of Jak-Nagiur."

This may be what Khelavaster refers to as the foolish legends that built up around the 
quest for the crumpled scroll and the Trident of the Red Rooster.

5.3 The Red Rooster Inn

The Red Rooster Inn is mentioned in the executable and is probably a red herring. It was 
thought in earlier versions of ADOM that the innkeeper would produce the Trident of the 
Red Rooster in the Red Rooster Inn at dawn.

5.4 The Volcano

There is a volcano mentioned in the executable, but no character has ever found such a 
location. It may be a remnant left over from earlier development of ADOM, possibly 
designed to be the location where the Chaos Orb of Elemental Fire could be found prior 
to implementation of the Tower of Eternal Flames.

5.5 The Weird Tome

The Ghost Librarian in the Library of Niltrias demands silence.  In practice, this 
means the PC must spend a certain amount of time in the Library without speaking.  
Spellcasting is allowed.  After spending the required number of turns (unknown, but 
well spent reading spellbooks) without speaking, upon 'C'hatting with him, he gives 
the PC the weird tome. He instructs the PC to deliver it to the Mad Minstrel, who will 
in turn reward the PC with five cursed scrolls of chaos resistance.

The mystery about the book is the fact that nobody has managed to read it.

See section 2.22.2.1 for more details about the Ghost Librarian and the weird tome.

