1.                        EARLY GAME STRATEGIES


1.1 What kind of character is good for each starsign?


A) Raven

The +10 to speed is good for all PCs. It can save the life of low level PCs who need to 
run away from a monster they can't handle. The "messengers will reach you faster" refers 
to the delivery of the rune-covered trident, which happens faster for those born in this 
month, a nice bonus. The "harder to trick by deceptions" grants resistance to confusion 
attacks by dopplegangers. The stronger companions characteristic makes this month 
excellent for bards.

B) Book 

Lawful tendencies is a weak effect. One free skill increase each level helps all PCs, 
especially those with low learning. Increased chance to learn spells means borderline 
cases have a better chance. This is not the ideal month for a wizard - they are already 
great at learning spells. More suited to elven fighting classes or a dwarvish paladin. 

C) Wand 

Here we have the sign for a neutral wizard. Gray elven wizards are ideal with their 
naturally high mana and neutral alignment. They are somewhat difficult to keep alive in 
the early game but become enormously powerful in the mid- and endgame.

D) Unicorn 

Generic sign with resistance to corruption. Pretty attractive for any PC going for an 
ultra ending, especially an aspiring Avatar of Order. The fact that lawful alignment is 
difficult to change means such a PC can commit a few chaotic acts and get away with it 
without becoming a fallen champion. Also nice for an aspiring (ultimate) chaos god, 
since crowned chaotics are corrupted more rapidly than others.

E) Salamander 

Very attractive for elementalists, who rely on a lot of fire magic. Not half bad for a 
necromancer who finds some fire-based spellbooks, either. Necromancers need that +3 to 
Mana.

F) Dragon 

Fighters. The +1 to toughness is not significant - that is within the variability for 
the stat for identical race/class PCs. The -3 to willpower is significant and makes 
this unattractive for those who need it in the early game - wizards, mindcrafters. Not 
a bad month for paladins with both weapon and combat magic costs reduced.

G) Sword 

Learning bonus is insignificant, although it can push a PC from illiterate to literate. 
The 20% reduction in cost to train melee weapon skills makes this attractive for a PC 
that really wants to become super-proficient with a weapon. Not a bad choice for rangers 
who start the game dual wielding swords.

H) Falcon 

Grants the survival skill to any character. This skill is generally considered as being 
of little use (see section 0.4). The willpower bonus is somewhat useful for spellcasters 
and mindcrafters, although better starsigns exist for those classes. The charisma bonus 
is of little significance for any character, with the possible exception of bards, 
necromancers and male merchants. The free talent is good for all PCs, especially for 
gnomish and hurthling bards, as it guarantees them both a very useful heir gift and the 
possibility to go for the treasure hunter talent.

I) Cup 

Another sign for wizards. Higher learning to start and the 10% reduction to gain a level 
means they advance rapidly, which is very helpful in keeping them alive at low level. The 
20% effectivity increase in learning spells also helps keep them alive in the early game, 
while the player has not had time to raise their learning score.

J) Candle 

This can be an unbelievable sign for trolls. They heal rapidly anyway, but those born in 
this month almost don't need the Healing skill! Almost. Get it and they seem to have 
natural regeneration. Playing a trollish healer born in this month is almost cheating. ;-)

K) Wolf 

Significant benefits to perception and willpower. The willpower is good for wizards and 
mindcrafters, of course. Races that start with lower perception include dwarves, orcs and 
of course trolls.

L) Tree 

Made for mindcrafters, who really need that +5 to willpower in the early game. Not bad 
for wizards either.


1.2 Places to go to start


1.2.1 Terinyo


1.2.1.1 Tywat Pare

Tywat Pare is the sheriff in Terinyo. He is the source of two quests. The first is to 
find and kill Kranach, a raider lord terrorizing the countryside. The rewards for this 
quest are a lawful boost to alignment and 3000 gold pieces. Note that the lawful boost 
is greater if a magnanimous PC leaves the 3000 gold pieces on the ground where Tywat 
Pare drops them.

The second quest is available once the PC reaches experience level ten. The quest 
objective is to kill the crime lord Hotzenplotz, who can be found in the outlaw village 
Lawenilothehl near Terinyo. Note that attacking Hotzenplotz while he is nonhostile is a 
chaotic act. However, the lawful boost received when Tywat Pare is informed of the success 
of the mission more than offsets this. As a reward for this quest Tywat Pare will give the 
PC a blessed amulet of order, an extraordinarily useful item. If the PC has done *both* 
the Kranach quest and the Hotzenplotz quest, Tywat Pare will also teach the PC the Law 
skill after completing the Hotzenplotz quest.

An amulet of order is also available from Tywat Pare if a lawful PC lures him to a 
location where outlaw types can be found.  Lawenilothehl is good for this, but a 
random wilderness encounter with bandits or raiders will also work.  Tywat Pare says 
"Let's slay some evil bandits!" and the game generates the message "He hands you a 
deputy's badge."  The badge is in fact an amulet of order, which ordinarily seems to 
be uncursed.  Cursed or blessed amulets are possible.

Tywat Pare will also pay a bounty ranging from 50 - 150 gold pieces for the corpse of 
outlaw types, including outlaws, outlaw leaders and muggers.  Some unusual corpses 
fall outside this range: A master assassin corpse is worth 500 gold pieces.  At the 
other end of the scale, cutpuse corpses are only worth 5 gold pieces.


1.2.1.1.1 Kranach 

Kranach and his gang can be found in the wilderness around Terinyo. Finding him is a 
matter of chance and thus can require considerable game time (and therefore food). There 
is an experience point limit for this quest. In general, Kranach flees the Drakalor Chain 
if the PC reaches experience level six. The exception is trolls, who require more 
experience to advance in level. The exact limit is not known, but trolls should definitely 
be able to find Kranach at experience level four, possibly also at experience level five. 
Note the experience level six disqualification especially in the case of mindcrafters, who 
are very weak in melee in the early game. They do not gain a true offensive mindcraft 
ability until they reach experience level six. Therefore it is very desirable to engage 
Kranach and his gang with a mindcrafter that is just about to achieve experience level 
six. Ideally, the first or second kill after finding Kranach should raise the mindcrafter 
PC to experience level six.

If Kranach leaves a corpse be sure to collect it and attempt to get it back to Tywat 
Pare in Terinyo. When given the corpse, he pays a bounty of 300 gold pieces and 
remarks "We'll put up his head in some public location." Later, on entering Munxip's 
food store, the PC receives the message "A mummified skull hangs over the door of this 
shop."


1.2.1.2 Rynt

Rynt is the village elder in Terinyo. He provides a quest, which is mutually exclusive 
with Guth'Alak's quest. The quest is to find the village carpenter Yrrigs who has 
disappeared in a nearby dungeon (which does not appear unless the quest has been 
assigned). The reward for this quest is lower prices in Munxip's food store and some 
directions on how to proceed with the game. Depending on exactly how the quest is 
completed, there are additional rewards available - see the next section.


1.2.1.2.1 The Village Dungeon, Jharod and Yrrigs

The Village Dungeon is where Yrrigs can be found, after receiving the quest from Rynt.  
It is southeast of Terinyo.  It consists of seven levels.  Two important NPCs are found in 
the Village Dungeon.  The first is Jharod, the healer, found on VD:4.  He will heal PCs of 
any alignment up to seven times.  This can be vital for those PCs without the Healing 
skill.  He will also cure sickness and poisoning.  Jharod will teach non-chaotic PCs the 
Healing skill, or provide a blessed stethoscope or potion of ultra healing and increase 
the knowledge of the skill for those PCs that already have it, providing the PC is able to 
prove his ability to show "mercy."

This can be done in two ways.  The first is healing wounded monsters with the Heal 
spell or potions of healing.  The second involves Yrrigs the carpenter, who has become 
insane due to his lengthy stay in the dungeon.  Yrrigs can be found on the last level 
of the dungeon, level seven.  He will be a purple 't' and will be hostile.  He is 
moderately dangerous. Despite his purple color, Yrrigs does not have a corrupting melee 
attack, nor does using Mindcraft against him corrupt a Mindcrafter.   Ideally he should 
be led to Jharod, who will heal him.  Yrrigs recovers from his illness and leaves a Manual 
of Bridge Building, a hatchet and a cursed oil of rust removal as rewards.  While leading 
Yrrigs to Jharod, the PC should use tactics that are as defensive as possible.  This means 
using the 'Coward' setting and possibly dual-wielding shields.  Problems arise when the 
PC encounters other monsters that must be fought on the way back to Jharod, of course.  
It is possible to complete Rynt's quest by killing Yrrigs.  In this case Yrrigs drops his 
items immediately, but the PC must demonstrate mercy in another way in order to receive 
the Healing skill from Jharod, and Rynt does not lower the prices in Munxip's shop.  
After saving Yrrigs, he can be found in Terinyo and can further train the Bridge Building 
skill.

The PC will receive lawful boosts during this quest, once for luring Yrrigs to Jharod 
and once for reporting back to Rynt.


1.2.1.3 Munxip

Munxip is the shopkeeper in Terinyo. His is a specialty shop, selling food only. Like all 
shopkeepers, he is *tough*. It is best for low level PCs to buy from his shop without 
attempting anything dishonest.


1.2.1.4 The tiny girl

The tiny girl is the source of a quest. The objective is to rescue her puppy from a 
dungeon northeast of Terinyo. The reward for the quest is a lawful boost. Note that this 
quest is difficult and entirely optional. See the next section for more details.


1.2.1.4.1 The Puppy Cave

The puppy dungeon is six levels deep; the puppy is on the last level. The last level must 
be entered before four days of game time have elapsed, otherwise the puppy is generated as 
a corpse, presumably dying from starvation. There are some guaranteed features in the 
dungeon. The first is a hive of giant ants, always found on the second level. These are 
very difficult to kill for a low level PC and ideally should be avoided completely. The 
second is an open cavernous level on the fifth level with a high monster generation rate 
that is characteristic of these open levels. Finally, there is a lesser vault on the last 
level of the dungeon. The puppy generally can be found without fighting through the vault; 
this is the best course of action. The puppy will be tame if found alive and will follow 
the PC out of the dungeon. Take care, however, since the puppy will fight the PC's enemies 
on the way out, even enemies that are too difficult for it to kill. The general approach 
on this quest should be to get to the bottom of the dungeon, carefully find the puppy and 
get out as fast as possible with a minimum of fighting. Note also that if the puppy is 
generated dead, retrieving the corpse and returning it to the tiny girl still provides 
some lawful boost. Furthermore this means that the quest can be done *at any time* after 
the PC has gained experience thus having a better chance of surviving the dungeon. It is 
worthwhile to do this quest even if the time limit has passed, since shops, altars, herbs 
and pools can be generated in this dungeon. Hives containing bees are common but not 
guaranteed.


1.2.1.5 Yggaz

Yggaz is the village fool in Terinyo. He is a source of rumors and will trade random 
potions for potions of booze.


1.2.1.6 Guth'Alak

Guth'Alak is a druid found in Terinyo. He provides two quests. The first is to find and 
kill an evil chaotic druid, Keethrax, who is found in a dungeon southeast of Terinyo. Note 
that this quest and Rynt's are mutually exclusive. There are two sets of rewards for this 
quest, chosen by the PC. The PC may choose between "knowledge" and "power." Choosing power 
results in gifts of a wand of cold and a spellbook of Frost Bolt. Choosing knowledge 
results in Guth'Alak teaching the PC the Herbalism skill(or Gardening, if Herbalism is 
already at 100). Guth'Alak provides additional rewards to druids who complete this quest.

Guth'Alak's second quest is available only after the PC reaches experience level 30. The 
quest is to find and help the Greater White Unicorn, Yrruir. This is the only way to 
access the unicorn quests, whether the PC chooses to attempt Yrruir's quest or Riurry's 
quest. See 0.10.2.4 and 0.10.3.8.


1.2.1.6.1 The Druid Dungeon and Keethrax

The corrupted evil druid Keethrax is found in the Druid Dungeon southeast of Terinyo. He 
is found on the bottom level of this seven level dungeon. As a druid, he maintains a 
contingent of hostile animals on the final level. These will include felines (see section 
0.9.2) and giant slugs (nasty acid breathers, but their corpses are a source of acid 
immunity). He is vulnerable to acid, webs and magic missiles, but little else in the way of 
magic. He uses missile weapons and casts spells including Darkness that make him a 
formidable enemy for PCs less than experience level ten. Some players regard him as an 
out-of-depth opponent and defer this quest until later in the game. He carries an 
artifact, the Black Torc, which is a decent missile weapon but permanently cursed. It is 
good fodder for the demented ratling (see section 2.4.8). Keethrax always leaves a corpse. 
Picking up his corpse is a chaotic act, but Guth'Alak will reward non-chaotic PCs with a 
potion of cure corruption in exchange for returning Keethrax's corpse to him.


1.2.1.7 Blup

Blup is a baby water dragon. He asks the PC to find his mother. He will also teach the 
swimming skill if given potions of carrot juice. Blessed potions are more effective as 
one would expect. His mother can be found in an underwater cave in the large lake west of 
Terinyo. This is not something low level PCs should attempt. It requires the ability to 
breathe water, or *very* careful planning. There are also very dangerous monsters found 
in the underwater cave. More information on this is found in section 2.13.


1.2.1.8 Townspeople

The remaining townspeople are simply flavor elements without any real importance in the 
game. Note however, that farmers are found in Terinyo. A farmer corpse is a quest object 
for Gaab'Baay (see section 2.21.6). Farmers will also trade rations for tools, such as a 
scythe.


1.2.2 Lawenilothehl

Lawenilothehl is an outlaw village found to the southwest of Terinyo. The name is an 
anagram of "hole in the wall", American slang for a shabby place. It contains a variety 
of shady characters who can be useful.


1.2.2.1 Yergius

Yergius is the head of the Thieves' Guild. He can teach or train a variety of useful skills for non-lawful PCs. They are Climbing, Detect Traps, Disarm traps, Pick locks, 
Pick Pockets and Stealth. Yergius teaches Pick Pockets to any non-lawful PC at no cost. Bear in mind that obtaining even the Pick Pockets skill from Yergius is a chaotic act. 
He will only teach or train the remainder of these skills once the PC has demonstrated 
his talents as a thief. In practice, this means that the PC must successfully use the 
Pick Pockets skill 28 times (according to the recent best estimates) against monsters vulnerable to this skill. This includes most humanoids, constructs and undead. Animals in general do not have pockets to pick, although ratlings (not rats or giant rats, but archers, duelists, fencers, etc.) are vulnerable. A successful application of the skill will result in a stolen item being added to the PC's inventory, or the message "The -foo- does not seem to own anything valuable." Note that Yergius' initial training results in a Pick Pockets skill level of one. This means that it is not really useful until it is trained and an experience level or two has been gained, thus making it eligible for advancement. Using the Pick Pockets skill is a relatively minor chaotic act, and furthermore seems to have a limited alignment effect. PCs never seem to become C- by 
using Pick Pockets.

It is also apparently possible to satisfy Yergius by robbing shops, but the quantitation 
is not understood. Robbing shops is a very risky activity for PC's less than experience 
level 20 anyway.

The main initial reason for attempting this quest is to satisfy Yergius and receive the 
Detect Traps skill from him. This makes the underground level of the Dwarven Graveyard 
and the Pyramid in general much easier and safer, not to mention the elemental temples.

After satisfying Yergius he will teach new skills for prices ranging from 3000 - 4000 
gold pieces. Detect Traps in particular is well worth the 3500 gold pieces it costs. 
He will also offer training of two different types: theoretical and practical. Theoretical 
training will raise the PC's dice modifier available when experience level advancement 
occurs. The maximum is +4d5. This is simply a matter of cash. If the PC has plenty of 
money available and wants to maximize a skill that Yergius trains quickly, pay him 
whatever is required to get the modifier to +4d5. The second form of training he offers is 
practical. When the PC trains in this way, it adds successful skill checks to the skill, 
making it easier to advance. This also is a matter of cash. It is a very good idea to use 
this practical training if the PC is about to face an area where a newly learned skill 
will be needed. Again, the underground level of the Dwarven Graveyard and the Pyramid are 
obvious examples of areas where the Detect Traps skill will be needed, while the PC has 
probably had little time to train the skill.

Another example where Yergius' theoretical and practical training can be very useful is 
the Climbing skill. Climbing = 100 is required for entering the Rift, which is something 
all spellcasters should seriously consider for access to the Sinister Library of Niltrias. 
Trolls should also visit the Library for much-needed experience. It is possible to train 
Climbing without Yergius' assistance, for example by mountaineering, but this takes place 
in the wilderness, thus wasting large amounts of valuable time.

Non-lawful PCs who kill Yergius become the new head of the Thieves' Guild and as such 
receive 50% off the prices at Barnabas' black market (see next section). Of course killing 
him means that he is no longer available for training, so take advantage of his training 
before killing him.

Yergius also sells thieves' picks to non-lawful PCs with the Pick Locks 
skill who have no Thieves' Picks.


1.2.2.2 Barnabas

Barnabas maintains a general store type of shop in Lawenilothehl. As might be expected 
from the general atmosphere in the town, it is a black market. As such, the prices 
demanded are very high. Nevertheless, it is worth visiting. Simply observing what is for 
sale identifies items. Barnabas also usually has rocks for sale at relatively reasonable 
prices, which can be tremendously useful for hurthlings. Barnabas occasionally has high 
quality items for sale, which can be within the monetary reach of PCs who have done the 
Kranach quest. In addition to the 50% reduction in prices for being head of the Thieves' 
Guild (see above section 1.2.2.1), Barnabas also changes his offers when the PC sells 
items: 1/4 of base value for nonmembers, 1/3 of base value for members and 1/2 of base 
value if the PC is the head of the Thieves' Guild, regardless of whether he was a former 
member or alignment.


1.2.2.3 Kranf Niest

Kranf Niest is a nefarious doctor in Lawenilothehl. He can teach PCs the Healing skill 
after completing Hotzenplotz's Jharod quest. Kranf Niest does not have the gentle touch of 
Jharod. When a chaotic PC learns the Healing skill from him, the PC is teleported away in 
a stunned and confused state, loses 1d3 points in each of the Appearance, Learning and 
Willpower categories and is corrupted slightly (1%). During this process, Kranf Niest 
removes any helmet the PC might be wearing, even if it is cursed.  If the PC already has 
Healing, Kranf Niest gives the PC a scalpel and stethoscope.  It is a chaotic act to attack 
Kranf Niest, but the PC receives a small net lawful boost for killing him.


1.2.2.4 Skriek

Skriek is a ratling found in Lawenilothehl. He sells keys. The prices seem exorbitant, but 
they can save a PC's life.


1.2.2.5 Hotzenplotz and his guards

Hotzenplotz is a crime lord found in Lawenilothehl. He assigns two quests. The first is to 
kill Jharod, the healer. Jharod, and thus this quest, is only available if the PC has 
chosen Rynt's Yrrigs quest rather than Guth'Alak's Keethrax quest. Hotzenplotz arranges 
for Kranf Niest to teach the Healing skill as a reward. The second is to kill Tywat Pare. 
The reward is an amulet of Chaos. If the PC is on a mission from Tywat Pare to kill 
Hotzenplotz, a couple of points are worth remembering. Hotzenplotz is fairly tough and 
uses poison. He will kill a PC without poison resistance in melee quite easily. Second, he 
does not heal. A PC can attack him, run away into the wilderness and repeat this process 
until he is dead. The combination of these two characteristics should make it clear that 
the best way to attack him is with missiles or ranged spells.


1.2.2.6 Other inhabitants of Lawenilothehl

The other inhabitants are simply flavor elements with no real role in the game. They 
include muggers, beggars, cutpurses, bandits, outlaws and outlaw leaders. Beggars are 
useful because they will drop a potion of booze if the PC gives them ~50 gold pieces and 
then 'C'hats with them. It is usually cursed. Remember Yggaz, the fool in Terinyo, will 
trade random potions for potions of booze.


1.2.3 The Small Cave


1.2.3.1 Objectives, strategy for survival and items found in the Small Cave

The Small Cave is a popular place to start the game. It contains one very useful 
guaranteed item and often contains other non-guaranteed desirable items. The guaranteed 
items in the Small Cave are a scroll of information, a scroll of warning and a waterproof 
blanket. The scroll of information simply tells how many paces away the waterproof blanket 
is. The scroll of warning gives some advice about tactics for the small cave. It reads 
"Time is working against you!" This is true. When the PC enters the small cave, monsters 
are generated on the level as is true of any dungeon level. As the original monsters are 
killed off, new monsters are generated. The new monsters are generated differently than on 
any other level in the game. They have approximately double the experience level of the 
PC. As might be imagined, this quickly gets very difficult to cope with and is the basis 
for the eternium man challenge game (see Appendix N, section N.1.2). This offers a way to 
quickly gain experience levels, but as a rule, PCs should get out of the Small Cave by 
experience level 5 at most.

The Small Cave also contains a down staircase which leads to the Unremarkable Dungeon. The 
Unremarkable Dungeon is normal in terms of danger and monster generation. It is also 
essential to enter the Unremarkable Dungeon at some point if the PC plans to try a special 
ending.

Out of depth weapons are sometimes found in the Small Cave. Eternium two-handed swords and 
halberds of defense are examples. Artifacts can be generated in the Small Cave, but this 
is rare. Altars can also be generated in the Small Cave.

Less interesting items are virtually guaranteed as well. The Small Cave always seems to 
contain some type of cloak, one or more quarterstaves and a shield of some type. These 
items are typically of low quality but useful nonetheless.

The general strategy for the Small Cave is to get in, find the waterproof blanket as 
quickly as possible, optionally find the down staircase and get out. Getting out can be 
via descent through the Unremarkable Dungeon or ascent back to the wilderness.

Note that the monsters generated in the Small Cave are in general common types: goblins, 
kobolds, bats, rats and the like. Making a first kill in the Small Cave is not a good idea 
if a special ending is planned (see section 0.9.1).


1.2.3.2 Should PCs descend through the Unremarkable Dungeon?

After retrieving the waterproof blanket and locating the down stairs in the Small Cave 
(easier said than done), PCs may choose to descend through the Unremarkable Dungeon. As 
mentioned, it is essential to go through this dungeon in order to complete a special 
ending. If the PC chooses to do this, the Kranach quest will be lost, since the PC will be 
greater than experience level six by the time the Unremarkable Dungeon is traversed. The 
chance to complete the puppy quest successfully will also be lost, since the four day time 
limit will expire by the time the PC manages to get back to Terinyo. Despite the fact that 
monsters are generated in the Small Cave at twice the PC's experience level, it is 
possible to leave the Small Cave and reenter it later in order to gain access to the 
Unremarkable Dungeon. It can be done using invisibility. The monsters generated are high 
level relative to the PC, but they are not in general "special" monsters that have the 
ability to see invisible. Thus a high level PC can use invisibility to make a quick dash 
through the Small Cave and descend to the Unremarkable Dungeon.

Items that grant invisibility are by no means guaranteed so this strategy is not available 
to every PC. Many players will descend through the Unremarkable Dungeon every time if 
possible.


1.2.3.2.1 The nature of the Unremarkable Dungeon

The Unremarkable Dungeon is (probably deliberately by TB) misnamed. It is quite 
remarkable. It generally contains more special features - altars, pools, forges, herbs, 
shops and the like, than any other dungeon in the game. These are all nice features. The 
Unremarkable Dungeon also seems to contain more door traps than any other dungeon, which 
is not so nice. In any case, the bottom of the Unremarkable Dungeon, level 7 or 8, contains 
two up staircases. One of the staircases leads to the High Mountain Village.


1.2.3.2.2 The High Mountain Village - introduction

The High Mountain Village is an interesting wilderness location. It contains a shop and 
various NPCs who are mostly useful to chaotics and essential for those PCs attempting a 
special ending. One significant problem is the possibility of meeting a Stone Giant Lord 
upon entering the High Mountain Village. This monster is very difficult to defeat for a 
relatively low level PC that has descended directly from the Small Cave through the 
Unremarkable Dungeon to the High Mountain Village. The Stone Giant Lord is not generated 
every time, but the possibility is an argument against entering the Unremarkable Dungeon 
directly from the Small Cave with a low level PC. The High Mountain Village contains a 
hidden exit to the northern central part of the wilderness map. It is found from the 
inside of the western village wall. This means that the PC need not go all the way back 
through the Unremarkable Dungeon and the Small Cave in order to exit.

More on the High Mountain Village is found in section 2.21.


1.2.4 The Infinite Dungeon - beginning

More about the Infinite Dungeon (ID) can be found in section 2.25. Here we are concerned 
only with the start of the game.


1.2.4.1 Why start the game in the Infinite Dungeon?

Starting the game in the ID is a very conservative approach for PCs that are weak at the 
start of the game. Given the significance of the first kill, it is probably not advisable 
to make the first kill in the ID, but gaining further experience while staying on level 
one of the ID is about as safe as things get in ADOM. The PC can flee from anything 
threatening, such as dark rooms or tension rooms, by exiting the ID and reentering. This 
strategy is one way to get difficult classes to experience level five or so before the ID 
becomes intolerably tedious.


1.2.5 The Wilderness

The wilderness is the overland map of the Drakalor Chain. It is often regarded as a curse 
by new players, whose PC's are killed in wilderness encounters and have difficulty keeping 
their PCs fed during treks across the wilderness. Advanced players with PCs who are well 
equipped to deal with the wilderness regard it as a wonderful resource.

The Survival skill can be useful for lengthy stays in the wilderness, but note that 
applying it wastes a lot of game time.


1.2.5.1 Why start the game in the Wilderness?

Many players will start the game in the wilderness, at least for the first kill, because 
the first monster killed can be controlled according to what type of wilderness square 
generates an encounter.


1.2.5.2 Strategy and problems in the wilderness

In order to avoid wasting too much time in the wilderness (e.g. because of the dreadful 90 
day limit), it is good to know how long it actually takes to do things in the wilderness.

All times are approximate since there are slight variations of some minutes. It is also 
the case that without apparent reason walking times are sometimes doubled. This can happen 
for any terrain type and might be a bug. Recent reports (September 25th, 2000) indicate 
that traveling through the wilderness while burdened or strained does not cause this 
phenomenon. Being burdened or strained has a marginal, if any, effect on movement time in 
the wilderness.


Time Spent    Action

nothing       changing body armor
60 min        changing other parts of equipment
60 min        resting
60 min        moving onto a plains, road, water, or special
              (dungeon entrance and the like) square
90 min        moving onto a hills square
120 min       moving onto a forest square
180 min       moving onto a swamp square
300 min       moving onto a mountain square (provided you own a climbing set)
240 min       applying Survival (Rangers of level 1-5 and non-Rangers)
120 min       applying Survival (Rangers of level 6-50)

Note that the swimming skill and water breathing intrinsic have no effect on the time 
needed to move onto a water square. Likewise, the climbing skill and the 
blessed/uncursed/cursed staus of a climbing set have no effect on the time needed to move 
onto a mountain square.

Note that a climbing set is required to move onto mountains. It is important to know the 
status of a climbing set, in particular making sure it is not cursed. A cursed climbing 
set will fail at the most inopportune moment. At a minimum, the resulting slip while 
mountaineering will cause extensive equipment destruction. It is often fatal. The blessed 
vs uncursed status seems to have little or no effect.


1.2.5.3 The Survival skill

Successfully applying the Survival skill when not bloated increases the 
satiation value of the PC by about 100 (equivalent to 1/5 large ration, see 
Appendix G). This is roughly tripled for Rangers of level 6 or above. These 
values hold for both water and land squares.

If the PC is already bloated, his satiation value isn't increased. Instead, 
he gathers plant seeds (on land squares) or goes fishing (on water squares). 
The amount of seeds gathered does not depend on terrain type or skill value 
and averages at about 5.2. For Rangers of level 6 or above, the average 
number of seeds gathered is about 16.7.

When fishing is successful, the PC obtains exactly one piece of fish meat.

The chances of success when applying the Survival skill depend on skill value, 
terrain type and the Ranger level 6 class power. The following success rates 
were measured by applying the Survival skill 100 times, with a skill value of 
100. The "normal" column applies to non-Rangers and Rangers of level 1-5, the 
"high" column to Rangers of level 6-50.

                              normal   high
Special (dungeon, village)    100%     100%
Forest                        100%     100%
Hills                          98%     100%
Plains                         96%     100%
Road                           93%     100%
Swamp                          80%      99%
Mountains                      79%      99%
Water                          43%      72%


1.3 Places to avoid in the early game

There are a few locations on the wilderness map that are to be avoided for low level PCs. 
One of the more mundane is the road found in the central part of the wilderness. 
Unfortunately, the easy traveling afforded by this road attracts monsters who will try to 
kill new adventurers. It is quite likely that a hostile group of chaos brothers and 
sisters will be found on this road, as well as wandering bands of bandits and other outlaw 
types, including assassins, who use poison. Bottom line: avoid the road with a low level 
PC. Travel through the plains and forest areas instead.

As far as truly deadly areas go, the entrance to Darkforge is one. It is found in the 
central part of the map near the southern border. Darkforge itself is the second level of 
this particular dungeon. The danger level of the top level is not that high, but the down 
staircase is guarded by a steel golem. These are very tough monsters for a low level PC to 
defeat. A low level wizard who has trained the Lightning Bolt spell may have a chance but 
is asking for trouble. Another wilderness location that will kill low level PCs very 
quickly is the Tower of Eternal flames. Without good fire resistance and other special 
equipment, both the PC and his inventory will be incinerated. See section 2.19 for more on 
the Tower of Eternal Flames. Shyssiryxius' cave is difficult for low level PCs due to the 
need for water breathing or high hitpoints and on-demand teleportation, as well as the 
presence of nasty aquatic beasts such as dragon turtles. Some locations, such as the Rift 
and the Minotaur Maze, do not allow low level PCs to enter.


1.4 What's next?

After exploring the area around Terinyo, the next step is to undertake a trek through the 
wilderness to the main dungeon in the game, the Caverns of Chaos (CoC). If the PC chose 
Rynt's quest, Rynt will provide some advice about finding the CoC. Remember to take enough 
food to survive the trip through the wilderness! If the PC chose to descend through the 
Unremarkable Dungeon, he is already quite close to the entrance of the CoC, which is found 
in the western central part of the wilderness map.
