0.                        WHOLE-GAME ISSUES


0.1 Races, classes and their combination


0.1.1 General characteristics

A list of the races can be found in the ADOM manual. It also gives a bit of background 
about each, much of which is flavor and irrelevant in terms of gameplay.

Each race has unique characteristics including initial alignment, trained skills and 
modifiers to attributes. Skills in ADOM vary in terms of availability. All PCs are born 
with First Aid and Listening. All PCs other than Beastfighters and Barbarians with a 
Learning score of 10 or greater are born with Literacy. Many skills can be taught or 
trained by various NPCs during the game. Other skills are much more difficult to obtain 
if the PC is not born with them. Skills other than Alertness and Healing can be wished 
for. Any skill can be obtained from a potion of education, but this is a matter of 
random chance and cannot be counted on. Skills available only from wishes or potions of 
education are referred to as "Nonguaranteed Skills" for the sake of the tables below. 
The first table shows the starting alignment and trained skills that each race is born 
with.


Race      Initial alignment  Guaranteed or NPC-available Skills  Nonguaranteed Skills 
----      -----------------  ----------------------------------  --------------------

Drakeling Neutral            Swimming                            Alertness, 
                                                                 Food Preservation, Music 
Dwarf     Lawful             Climbing, Detect Traps, Smithing    Metallurgy, Mining 
Dark Elf  Chaotic            Climbing, Stealth                   Alertness, Find Weakness 
Gray Elf  Neutral            Listening, Literacy, Stealth        Dodge 
High Elf  Lawful             Listening, Literacy, Stealth        Dodge 
Gnome     Neutral            Listening, Pick Pockets             Gemology, Mining, 
                                                                 Ventriloquism 
Human     Neutral            Climbing, Haggling, Swimming        Food Preservation 
Hurthling Lawful             Stealth                             Archery, Cooking, 
                                                                 Food Preservation, 
                                                                 Gardening 
Orc       Chaotic            Backstabbing, Climbing              Find Weakness, Metallurgy, 
                                                                 Mining 
Troll     Chaotic            Bridge Building                     Athletics, Food 
                                                                 Preservation, Gemology, 
                                                                 Mining 


The ADOM manual also contains a list of the classes along with their characteristics and 
class powers. A table similar to that above showing the trained skills each class is born 
with:


Class        Guaranteed or NPC-available Skills  Nonguaranteed Skills 
-----        ----------------------------------  --------------------

Archer       Climbing, Listening, Stealth        Alertness, Archery, Concentration, 
                                                 Dodge, Fletchery 
Assassin     Backstabbing, Climbing, Detect      Alchemy, Alertness, Archery, Dodge,
             Traps, Pick Locks, Stealth, Two     Find Weakness
             Weapon Combat    
Barbarian    Climbing, First Aid, Herbalism,     Athletics, Dodge, Survival, Woodcraft
             Stealth, Swimming, Two Weapon 
             Combat  
Bard         None guaranteed                     Music 
Beastfighter Climbing, Healing, Herbalism,       Athletics, Dodge, Survival
             Listening, Stealth, Swimming  
Druid        Climbing, First Aid, Healing,       Concentration, Gardening, 
             Herbalism, Listening, Literacy,     Survival, Woodcraft 
             Swimming  
Elementalist Climbing, Healing, Listening,       Concentration, Gemology, Metallurgy
             Literacy, Swimming  
Farmer       Bridge Building, First Aid,         Archery, Cooking, Fletchery, Food
             Haggling, Herbalism, Smithing,      Preservation, Gardening, 
             Stealth                             Survival, Woodcraft 
Fighter      Stealth, Two Weapon Combat          Athletics, Archery, Dodge, 
                                                 Find Weakness, Metallurgy 
Healer       First Aid, Healing, Herbalism,      Alertness, Concentration, Cooking, 
             Literacy                            Find Weakness 
Merchant     Haggling, Herbalism,                Appraising, Detect Item Status, 
             Literacy, Pick Pockets              Gemology, Metallurgy, 
                                                 Survival (Merchants who specialize in 
                                                 magical potions also receive Alchemy)
Mindcrafter  Haggling, Herbalism, Literacy       Concentration, Gemology, Music
             Stealth
Monk         Healing, Literacy, Stealth          Alertness, Athletics, Concentration, 
                                                 Dodge, Find Weakness 
Necromancer  Herbalism, Literacy, Stealth        Alchemy, Appraising, Concentration, 
                                                 Find Weakness, Food Preservation, 
                                                 Necromancy 
Paladin      Healing, Law (if lawful             Athletics, Concentration, Dodge
             initially), Literacy, Stealth, 
             Swimming, Two Weapon Combat  
Priest       First Aid, Healing, Herbalism,      Concentration, Detect Item Status, 
             Literacy                            Music  
Ranger       Climbing, Healing, Herbalism,       Alertness, Archery, Athletics, Dodge,
             Swimming, Two Weapon Combat         Food Preservation, Survival, Woodcraft  
Thief        Backstabbing, Climbing, Detect      Alertness, Appraising
             Traps, Disarm Traps, Listening, 
             Pick Locks, Pick Pockets, Stealth   
Weaponsmith  Detect Traps, Haggling, Smithing    Appraising, Athletics, Concentration, 
                                                 Find Weakness, Metallurgy  
Wizard       Healing, Herbalism, Literacy,       Alchemy, Concentration, 
             Stealth                             Ventriloquism  


There are definite effects on gameplay depending on the alignment, skills and birthsign 
the PC is born with. Note that none of the races is born with the Healing skill; it is 
entirely class-dependent. Nine classes are born with Healing. It is essential to obtain 
this skill. This means that those without it *must* choose Rynt's quest as opposed to 
Guth'Alak's in Terinyo, whether they intend to actually obtain the skill from Jharod or 
Kranf Niest. This puts restrictions on the game right away, since the Keethrax quest and 
thus a guaranteed artifact and potion of cure corruption is forfeited before the game 
even starts. Further, three races start with chaotic alignment. If the PC wants to 
receive Healing from Jharod, thus avoiding Kranf Niest's stat drains, alignment must be 
changed to neutral (or lawful).

Note also that no race starts with Herbalism, the other skill available through a 
Terinyo quest. If the player wants maximum flexibility - to do either Rynt's or 
Guth'Alak's quest, or neither (in the case of a minimalist challenge game) - choose a 
class that starts with Healing, Herbalism, or ideally both, such as a Beastfighter, 
Druid, Healer, Priest, Ranger or Wizard.

If there is a skill that is difficult to obtain that you cannot live without, such as 
Alertness, play a dark elf or drakeling, or choose a class that is born with it - 
Archers, Healers, Monks, Rangers and Thieves all start with this skill. Many players 
feel similarly about Detect Item Status - play Priests or a Merchant for a challenge.

A PC that trains a given skill due to both race and class will be especially proficient 
with that skill. This makes certain combinations especially powerful. Dwarven 
Weaponsmiths (doubly trained Metallurgy and Smithing), Hurthling Archers (doubly trained 
Archery), Hurthling Farmers (doubly trained Archery, Cooking, Food Preservation, 
Gardening, Stealth) and Dark Elven Rangers (doubly trained Alertness and Climbing) are 
examples.

The following table was generated directly from the executable. Remember that 10 is 
regarded as an average attribute. It gives a general idea of which races and classes 
receive bonuses or penalties to each attribute at the start of the game:

Race starting attributes:

                St  Le  Wi  Dx  To  Ch  Ap  Ma  Pe  Total

Dark Elf         9  10  12  15   9   7  12  16  13  +13
Drakeling       13  10  12   9  13  10   8  10   9  + 6
Dwarf           12  11  11   9  13   9   9  10  11  + 5
Gnome            9  11   9  12  11  12  10  14  11  + 9
Gray Elf        10  13  10  14   7   8  18  15  14  +19
High Elf        10  13   9  15   8  10  14  13  14  +16
Human           10  12  10  10  10  10  10  10  10  + 2
Hurthling        6  10  10  15  12  12  10   8  10  + 3
Orc             14   8  10  10  13   8   7   6   8  - 6
Troll           18   5   8   8  18   6   5   6   7  - 9

Class starting attributes:

                St  Le  Wi  Dx  To  Ch  Ap  Ma  Pe  Total

Archer:         +1   0   0  +4   0   0  +1   0  +3  + 9
Assassin:       +1  +1   0  +2  +1  -2   0   0  +2  + 5
Barbarian:      +5  -2  +2  +1  +3  -1  -1  -4  +1  + 4
Bard:            0  +2  +1  +2  +1  +3  +3  +1  +1  +14
Beastfighter:   +4  -1  -1  +4  +4  -2  -1  -2  +2  + 7
Druid:           0  +1   0   0  +2   0   0  +2  +1  + 6
Elementalist:   -1  +2  +1  +1   0  -2  -1  +2   0  + 2
Farmer:         +2  -2   0   0  +1  -1  -1   0  +1  + 0
Fighter:        +3  -2  +1   0  +1   0   0  -3   0  + 0
Healer:         -1  +1  +3  +1  +4  +1   0  +1  +1  +11
Merchant:        0  +1  +2  +1   0  +3  +1   0  +1  + 9
Mindcrafter:    -3  +2  +4  +1  -1   0   0  +1  +1  + 5
Monk:           +2  +1  +3  +2  +1  -3  -1  -1  +2  + 6
Necromancer:    -1  +2  +2   0  +1  -4  -3  +3   0  + 0
Paladin:        +2  +1  +2  -1   0  +4  +2  +1   0  +11
Priest:          0  +2  +4  -1   0  +1   0  +3   0  + 9
Ranger:         +2  -1   0  +1  +2  -1   0   0  +3  + 6
Thief:           0   0   0  +3   0  +1  +2   0  +3  + 9
Weaponsmith:    +2  -1  +1  +1  +3   0   0  +1  +1  + 8
Wizard:         -2  +3  +3  +1  -1  +2   0  +3  +1  +10

The ADOM manual gives some hints about race/class combinations. For instance, the manual 
identifies trolls as the strongest, toughest and stupidest race in the game and suggests 
that they make good fighters (because of their strength and toughness) and lousy 
magicians (because of their low learning and mana). This is true as far as it goes, but 
trollish wizards can be a viable combination if they are played more as fighters to start 
and later develop their magical talents. Elves make fantastic wizards (due to their high 
learning and mana) once they gain some experience, but are difficult to keep alive in the 
early game because of their low toughness. Humans are a jack of all trades race and can 
be used with all classes. Some combinations favored by newsgroup readers:

Trollish beastfighters and barbarians - brute force fighters
Gnomish elementalists - magic users with more toughness than elves
Elven archers - natural talent with bows
Elven wizards - high mana and learning
Dwarven weaponsmiths - natural smithing talent
Hurthling archers - natural talent with thrown rocks

Classes and combinations that are regarded as difficult:

Farmers
Merchants, especially dark elven merchants because of their low charisma and toughness
Necromancers in general are very difficult to keep alive at low levels


0.1.2 Lifespans

Race       Starting age  Max age     Grownup  Middle aged  Old   Very Old

Drakeling  20+1d6        60+8d4      22       40           60    80
Dwarf      50+5d4        400+10d10   60       180          280   380
Dark Elf   100+10d6      1200+10d10  120      400          750   900
Gray Elf   200+20d10     2000+20d40  250      800          1500  2000
High Elf   150+10d10     1500+10d40  200      650          1000  1350
Gnome      75+10d6       600+10d20   100      300          500   620
Human      12+4d6        40+10d8     20       40           60    80
Hurthling  25+2d10       80+10d4     32       60           75    90
Orc        10+2d4        35+3d4      15       25           32    40
Troll      8+1d10        35+12d4     15       25           35    45


0.1.3 Special considerations

Dark Elves - Dark Elves receive very low offers and high prices in Waldenbrook's Dwarftown 
shop.  Dark Elven Necromancers are very Chaotic.  It takes some work to get them to Neutral 
alignment to receive Healing from Jharod, for instance, if that is desired.  Dark elves are 
unique in that spider corpses are nutritious for them.  Poison resistance can still be gained 
from spider corpses.

Drakelings - Drakelings face special problems in the ToEF (see section 2.19) and D: 49 (see 
section 3.12).  Drakelings who are unlucky enough to find a greater white dragon vault will 
also face speed problems.

Druids - All Druids start at some flavor of neutral alignment.

Elves - All elves, High, Gray, or Dark, have very long lifespans.  This is worth considering 
since several of the high level monsters encountered in ADOM have an aging attack.  Ghost 
Lords, for instance, may well age a human, dwarf or troll to death in one or two hits, since 
these PCs have a life span of 100 years or so at most.  Elven PCs do not need to worry about 
this, since they live for at least 1000 years.  In gammas before 1.0.0, elven lifespans as 
long as 3500 years have been observed.  The upper limit is not known in ADOM 1.0.0.  Balancing 
this is the fact that they are more fragile than other races in terms of toughness in the 
early game.

Gnomes - Gnomes require only 3/4 the number of missile weapon marks to advance their 
crossbow skill level relative to other races.

Hurthlings - Hurthlings start the game with the Thrown Rocks missile weapon skill at level 
four.  They also start the game wearing a cursed ring, unfortunately.  Hurthlings also have a 
racial dislike for shoes, which causes a loss of dexterity when Hurthlings don footwear in 
ADOM.  Hurthlings also have an advantage over other races when training the slings and thrown 
rocks missile weapon skills: they require only two thirds of the marks other races do in order 
to advance a skill level.

Merchants - Merchants always specialize in a certain item: potions, rings, scrolls, or wands.  
This specialization allows them to identify any item in that category on sight.  Merchants 
have the ability to use thrown gold pieces as effective missiles.  Dopplegangers are not able 
to deflect gold pieces thrown by merchants.  This is the only known way to attack dopplegangers 
with missiles.

Trolls - Trolls advance in experience level very slowly relative to other races.  Trolls start 
the game with the Twohanded Weapons melee skill at level two.  Do not pay any attention to this 
if you are playing a trollish beastfighter.  Drop that club and fight unarmed.

0.1.4 Race-specific starting items

Bards start with a pet that is race-dependent. The starting pets:

Race       Pet

Drakeling  Giant lizard
Dwarf      Cave bear
Dark Elf   Giant spider
Gray Elf   Fairy dragon
High Elf   Cooshoo
Gnome      Giant raccoon
Human      Silver wolf
Hurthling  Big dog
Orc        Dire wolf
Troll      Cave bear

0.1.5 Class-specific starting items

Class		Heir item

Archer		40 winged quarrels of hunting
Assassin	Poisonous adamantium dagger
Barbarian	Brutal mithril two handed sword
Bard		Seven league boots
Beastfighter	Vigilant light furs of protection
Druid		Yellow leather armor of balance
Elementalist	Ring of minor elemental mastery
Farmer		Vigilant clothes of resilience
Fighter		Eternium girdle
Healer		Elven chain mail of health
Merchant	Beautiful leather armor of carrying
Mindcrafter	Empowered robe of protection
Monk		Padded clean robe of defense
Necromancer	Chaotic skull staff of slaughtering
Paladin		Lawful mithril long sword (even chaotics get this - probably a bug)
Priest		Heavy mace of the sun
Ranger		Masterwork mithril battle axe
Thief		Adamantium dagger of penetration
Weaponsmith	Brutal mithril warhammer
Wizard		Wand of fire (30 charges)



0.2 Alignment and Altars


0.2.1 What is alignment?

Alignment reflects the moral nature of the PC. For example, PCs with lawful alignment 
generally do not slaughter innocents or steal from shops. Chaotic PCs will do these 
things and a lot worse besides. Neutral PCs choose from both options, doing nasty things 
when necessary to further their cause, but also performing good acts to maintain their 
balanced alignment.

A general and quite complete description of alignment can be found in the ADOM manual. 
It is assumed that the reader is familiar with that description. The effects alignment 
have on gameplay are discussed here. The effects are mostly evident to the player in 
terms of the quests and rewards that are available.

Quests, rewards and alignment restrictions:

Terinyo - quests are available to all PCs regardless of alignment, however Guth'Alak 
          will not reward chaotics with a potion of cure corruption for delivering a 
          chaos creature's corpse
Jharod - will not teach the Healing skill to chaotics, regardless of how Yrrigs is 
         dealt with
Hotzenplotz - quests are available regardless of alignment
Yergius - will not teach the Pick Pockets skill, or anything else, to lawfuls
Old Barbarian - will not give the Courage quest to chaotics
Unicorn quest - Yrruir will not give the quest to kill Riurry to chaotics.  
                There is some uncertainty/argument about this
Thrundarr - all quests are available regardless of alignment
Dwarven Mystic - rewards are dependent on alignment; chaotics will receive nothing 
                 from him
Kherab - quests are available regardless of alignment
Demented Ratling - assigns a quest only to chaotics
Gaab'Baay - assigns her quests to chaotics only
Assassin Prince - Filk quest is available regardless of alignment
Sharad-Waador - quest to kill Srraxxarrakex is available regardless of alignment
Mad Minstrel - reveals the location of the scintillating cave regardless of alignment
Khelavaster - will not summon the Trident of the Red Rooster for chaotics


0.2.2 Changing alignment

Changing alignment can be done in several ways.  It is easy to change from a lawful flavor 
of alignment to a chaotic one.  The PC need only commit chaotic acts, which include attacking 
non-hostile monsters, reading tracts of chaos, wearing an amulet of chaos, pickpocketing and 
eating undead corpses.  Attacking monsters with a weapon of vampirism or wearing armor of 
chaos will also move alignment towards chaotic in ADOM 1.0.0+.  Changing from chaotic towards 
neutrality and law is more difficult.  A blessed amulet of order, available from Tywat Pare, 
is helpful for this.  Completing lawful quests will move the PC's alignment towards law.  
Examples include the puppy quest, the Yrrigs quest, the Keethrax quest, Tywat Pare's and 
Thrundarr's quests.  Giving food or gold to beggars and seeds to farmers is lawful.  Healing 
the PC's pet (only when actually injured) is a lawful act.  Self-flagellation, using a whip 
in the tool slot, moves alignment towards lawful.  Wearing armor of order draws the PC's 
alignment towards lawful in ADOM 1.0.0+.

All of the above are gradual methods which take some time to accomplish an alignment change.  
Without question, the fastest and easiest way to change alignment is by making sacrifices on 
an altar.  See the section below about altars for more alignment change strategy.


0.2.3 Altars - How to use altars.

The main thing you do on altars is sacrificing (or 'O'ffering). Things that can be 
sacrificed include items, monsters and gold. When sacrificing items, you stand on top of 
the altar and 'O'ffer the item, which will then be accepted or rejected by the deity. 
When sacrificing monsters, you stand away from the altar, wait for the monster to step 
onto the altar, and then 'O'ffer it. Note that most humanoid monsters have the ability 
to speak. This means they can sacrifice the PC. Most, but not all, humanoids are chaotic. 
So idly standing around on an altar, especially a chaotic one, near humanoid enemies is 
a very unwise thing to do.

When sacrificing items, one might want to keep in mind the fact that some races' deities 
specially favor some item types. These can be found in the manual and are listed here for 
reference:

Humans: tools of all kind
Trolls: rocks, the larger the better
Hurthlings: cooked meals
Gnomes: gems
Dwarves: gold
High Elves and Gray Elves: magical rings
Dark Elves: magical wands and books
Orcs: melee weapons
Drakelings: musical instruments

Sacrificing monsters can be very bountiful, especially on levels with a high monster 
generation rate. There are a few things to be remembered, though:

Lawful and neutral gods don't like it when you sac "their beings", i.e. neutral beings 
to a neutral god or lawfuls to a lawful god. Chaotics don't care.

Bred, summoned, undead and unlife beings can not be sacrificed.

On any coaligned altar, you can detect your items' status by simply dropping the stuff on 
the altar regardless of piety level. Furthermore, when any offering has been accepted, 
you'll notice your standing with your deity. The effects are:

"MORTAL, YE HAVE PESTERED ME FOR TOO LONG!" - summons solars/spectres/greater daemons
"Mortal, ye art a pest."                    - A bolt of -damage type- hits you! 
"*I* hereby punish thee, puny mortal"       - equipment turned to dust
"You feel bad... very bad."                 - same piety level as above, dooming results 
                                              if no equipment
"Take this for ye impunity!"                - inventory cursed
"Mortal, you are a nuisance!"
You hear -deity- grumbling in anger.
For some seconds the ground rumbles. Nothing else happens.
-deity- seems to be unconcerned.
-deity- seems to be pleased.
-deity- seems to be very pleased with you.   - deity will bless water dropped on altar
You feel inner strength lifting you spirits. - same piety level as inner peace, deity 
                                               grants the Lucky intrinsic, occurs only if 
                                               the PC didn't have the Lucky intrinsic
You feel inner peace.                        - see above message about inner strength
You burn with the anticipation of power      - chaotic equivalent of inner peace
You feel spiritually invincible.
You feel very close to -deity-               - deity removes Cursed/Doomed intrinsics if 
                                               present ("You feel a terrible gloom being 
                                               lifted from you"), grants Fate Smiles 
                                               intrinsic
You feel extremely close to -deity-          - (pre/post)crowning possibility
-deity- seems to be absolutely close to you  - the PC is eligible for crowning: correct 
                                               alignment and the highest level of piety

Another message occurs only under the following circumstances: if a PC sacrifices 
enough to get to the spiritually invincible state in one turn, having neither the 
Lucky nor Fate Smiles intrinsics, the message "You feel spiritually elated!" is 
generated and the PC receives the Lucky and Fate Smiles intrinsics simultaneously.  
This works regardless of alignment.  There may be more details to be worked out 
concerning this regarding possession of the Cursed and/or Doomed intrinsics.

Other messages are generated when sacrificing under special circumstances 
(generally when the PC has offended his deity):

"*MORTAL, I AM NOT BUILDING A BLOODY GARDEN UP HERE! NO MORE TREES! }*" - the 
PC tried to sacrifice an animated tree; there is a typo, apparently, the }

A voice in your mind lectures you. "*WHAT A MEDIOCRE SIGN OF DEVOTION. IMPROVE!*" 
- the PC tried to sacrifice summoned creatures

You hear a booming voice in your mind...  "*BE WARNED! SACRIFICING MY OWN 
CREATURES IS NOT SOMETHING I WELCOME WITH JOY!*" - the PC tried to sacrifice 
a creature coaligned with the altar

-deity- booms: "*YOU DARE TO SACRIFICE MY GIFTS AT MY HOLY PLACE?!?*  "*FOOL!*" 
The -foo- is consumed by a -bar- light and disappears. - the PC sacrificed a 
divine gift

Suddenly -deity- speaks to you.  *YOU DARE TO OFFER THE CRAP SOLD BY RATLING TRADERS?*  
*FORGET IT!*  The -ratling fodder- disappears.

Messages when sacrificing in the dark:

"You feel a warm aura." - a lawful altar
"The air is suddenly very moist." - a neutral altar
"You suddenly feel a chilling cold." - a chaotic altar

These messages are generated regardless of piety. The piety messages follow these. 
Note that creatures cannot be sacrificed in the dark.

Sacrificing items, gold or monsters on an altar can change the alignment of the PC or 
the alignment of the altar. Note, however, that sacrificing at a lawful altar will not 
move a PCs alignment all the way to L+.  Likewise, sacrificing at a chaotic altar will 
not move a PCs alignment all the way to C-.  To achieve these alignments, the PC has to 
commit other lawful or chaotic acts, respectively (or wear an amulet corresponding to 
the desired alignment, preferably blessed).  In general, small sacrifices move the 
alignment of the PC towards the alignment of the altar. Large sacrifices move the 
alignment of the altar towards that of the PC. Live sacrifices can fall into either 
category depending on the experience level of the PC and the level of the monster being 
sacrificed. Converting the alignment of a PC or an altar with live sacrifices is a 
somewhat tricky and complicated business and can have dire consequences if the 
sacrificing is done incorrectly. Using gold is much more straightforward. To move a PC's 
alignment towards that of an altar, sacrifice small amounts of gold, 10 or 20 pieces, 
repeatedly. This will eventually result in a message: "*WELCOME BELIEVER*" when the PC's 
alignment changes to that of the altar. An additional message, "You feel your morals 
changing." occurs when changing from lawful to neutral on a chaotic altar or from chaotic 
to neutral on a lawful altar.  The exception to this easy alignment conversion is the case 
of highly experienced chaotic PCs. More about that special case is found in section 4.3, 
ultra endings. To change the alignment of an altar to match the PC's, sacrifice at least 
3000 gold at one time. The 3000 figure is a minimum; more may be required depending on 
the PC's experience level.

Some observations about sacrificing on nonaligned altars and changing the alignment of 
altars with live sacrifices: 

Druids should be very careful to avoid sacrificing animals at any time.

Lawful gods do not like having lawful creatures sacrificed; neutral gods do not like 
having neutral creatures sacrificed; chaotic gods are indifferent. This makes the 
situation simplest for chaotic PCs. They can sacrifice anything on chaotic altars with 
no fear of alignment change. This also means the situation is at a dead end: chaotic 
PC + chaotic altar means no alignment change is possible.

Any time a PC sacrifices at a nonaligned altar, *two* gods are involved: the PC's god, 
who may accept a large enough sacrifice and fight the nonaligned god for control of the 
altar, and the nonaligned god, who may accept small sacrifices from the PC and move the 
PCs alignment towards that of the altar. This also means there are two gods who may 
object to live sacrifices. It is always unwise to sacrifice creatures of the PC's 
alignment or the altar's alignment. The exception is chaotic PCs sacrificing at chaotic 
altars as described above.

The fact that two deities are involved when sacrificing on a nonaligned altar means a 
puzzling phenomenon may occur when sacrificing your race's god's preferred items on a 
nonaligned altar. The PC's deity may be able to accept the sacrifice and "deeply 
appreciate" it while simutaneously the nonaligned deity is angered by the fact that a 
nonaligned PC used the altar. Depending on the PC's piety relationship with the 
nonaligned god (it is possible to have a piety relationship with more than one god), this 
may result in a "deeply appreciates" message as well as a negative effect such as 
inventory cursing or destruction.

A live sacrifice at a nonaligned altar behaves similarly to non-live sacrifices in that 
small sacrifices move the PC toward the alignment of the altar while large ones move the 
altar to the PC's alignment, but it is much more difficult to predict exactly what will 
happen. There are many factors involved: the PC's experience level, crowned vs uncrowned 
status, piety relationship with both the PC's god and the nonaligned god as well as the 
experience level of the monster being sacrificed. A goblin is considered a large 
sacrifice for a level one PC but small for a level ten PC. It is very difficult to 
predict exactly what will happen in borderline cases. After reaching experience level 
five or so, it becomes very risky to attempt an altar conversion using a low level live 
sacrifice such as an orc or goblin. The god's standards are higher than that by this 
point.

If the PC angers a god by sacrificing one of his creatures, several negative consequences 
may result. For example, if a PC sacrifices a creature of his own alignment his god 
responds with: "*BE WARNED! SACRIFICING MY OWN CREATURES IS NOT SOMETHING I WELCOME WITH 
JOY!*" Repeating this act results in: "*YOU DARE TO SACRIFICE ONE OF MY CREATURES?* 
*DEFILER*" This may be followed by: "-deity- luckily seems unconcerned." depending on the 
PC's piety level. Repeating again results in the same two messages followed by conversion 
of a neutral altar to chaotic. This example was done with a neutral PC, exp lvl 5, 
sacrificing neutrals on a neutral altar which became chaotic. The PC did not gain the 
cursed or doomed intrinsics, nor did his alignment change.

A second example: a chaotic PC sacrificing neutral creatures on a neutral altar: First: 
"*YOU DARE TO SACRIFICE ONE OF MY CREATURES?* *DEFILER* You suddenly hear a thundering 
voice. *I* hereby punish thee, puny mortal. Your equipment turns to dust." Next: "*I* 
hereby punish thee, puny mortal! You barely notice some thoughts: I can't believe it!" 
The second message here is because the PC was wearing artifacts and artifacts only. The 
PC did not gain the cursed or doomed intrinsics. If the PC had been wearing any 
non-artifact equipment, it would have been destroyed. If the PC wore nothing, he gained 
the doomed, and not the cursed, intrinsic.

The implication of the above paragraph should be obvious: Wear ARTIFACTS AND ARTIFACTS 
ONLY when attempting to convert an altar. Wield a si if necessary. This completely avoids 
the equipment destruction and dooming penalties.

It is not clear exactly what the criteria are for inventory cursing versus equipment 
destruction (turned to dust) versus dooming versus bolts versus summoning. Dooming should 
only occur when the offended god wants to destroy the PC's equipment when the PC is 
wearing no equipment. Once again, it seems to depend on the PC's experience level, 
crowned vs uncrowned status, general piety level with respect to his god and possibly 
the nonaligned god as well. There has been a report of immediately being blasted with a 
bolt of True Matter when unsuccessfully attempting to convert a neutral altar with a 
Champion of Law on D: 45, for instance.

The chart below shows all of the possible combinations for PCs sacrificing live monsters 
on aligned and nonaligned altars. The "altar moves to" field *assumes the sacrifice is 
successful*. A dash means there is no change in the altar; these are the "proper" 
sacrifices a PC makes in order to gain piety and move towards the extreme of his 
alignment. The "god irritated" field is as follows: Yes means the PC's god is irritated 
- a lawful PC tried to sacrifice a lawful creature or a neutral PC tried to sacrifice a 
neutral creature. No means the sacrifice was proper, the god accepted the sacrifice, the 
PC gains piety and moves closer to the extreme of his alignment. Fight means the original 
god who owned the altar fights, and loses every time, to the god taking possession of it. 
Note that the changes are stepwise: a lawful PC first changes a chaotic altar to neutral 
then to lawful.

How the PC's alignment or piety level changes when converting altars is not proven for 
all cases. Note the case of a neutral sacrificing neutrals on a neutral altar. It is 
correct as written. The altar moves to chaotic with no (or a very, very small) alignment 
change or other negative consequences to the PC. Also note the remarkable case of neutral 
PCs sacrificing neutral monsters on a chaotic altar. This converts the altar to neutral 
with no noticeable alignment change. Lawfuls sacrificing lawfuls on a lawful altar may 
convert the altar to neutral, but not always. The PC always receives a noticeable 
alignment drop.

This chart will be updated as research progresses.


PC    altar    live sac    altar moves to    PC moves towards    god irritated

L       L          L          - or N                N                 Yes
L       L          N             -                  L+                No
L       L          C             -                  L+                No
L       N          L             ?                  ?                 Yes
L       N          N             L                  ?                 Fight
L       N          C             L                  ?                 Fight
L       C          L             ?                  ?                 Yes
L       C          N             N                  ?                 Fight
L       C          C             N                  ?                 Fight

N       L          L             N                  ?                 Fight
N       L          N             ?                  ?                 Yes
N       L          C             N                  ?                 Fight
N       N          L             -                  N=                No
N       N          N             C                  -                 Yes
N       N          C             -                  N=                No
N       C          L             N                  ?                 Fight
N       C          N             N (?!)             -                 Fight (?!)
N       C          C             N                  ?                 No

C       L          L             N                  ?                 Fight
C       L          N             N                  ?                 Fight
C       L          C             N                  ?                 Fight
C       N          L             C                  ?                 No
C       N          N             C                  ?                 No
C       N          C             C                  ?                 No
C       C          L             -                  C-                No
C       C          N             -                  C-                No
C       C          C             -                  C-                No

Note that only champions of Neutrality or Order can convert the altars in the elemental 
temples.

If all of this has confused more than it has helped, here are some rules of thumb:

1) DO NOT sacrifice a creature whose alignment is the same as the PC's or the altar's. 
If you need to take advantage of live sacrifices to increase piety, only sacrifice 
nonaligned monsters on an aligned altar.

2) If you must convert an altar, do it with gold. It is much, much safer.


0.2.4 Recovering from errors.

Precautions:

When converting an altar, remove all gear except for artifacts. Also, remember that the 
bigger your sacrifice, the more likely it is that the altar converts - but remember, this 
sacrifice probably has minimal effect on piety, so don't make it ridiculously huge.

Dropping items on a nonaligned altar will make the deity that owns the altar angry. 
This causes some warning messages along the lines of "GET YOUR JUNK OFF MY ALTAR." 
Ordinarily this should be enough warning. If an extended drop command is used, however, 
there seems to be a bug present that allows the dropping to continue until the angry 
deity curses the inventory of the PC. Watch out for this.

If things go wrong:

1) Inventory cursed

By the time you have enough valuable stuff to sacrifice, you should be able to uncurse 
a cursed inventory with little trouble. Get to an aligned altar immediately. Bless your 
potions of water by dropping them on the altar if you are in sufficient standing with 
your deity. If not, sacrifice gold until you are. Dip a scroll of uncursing into your 
new holy water, read it, and voila, all of your stuff is back to uncursed status. 
Obviously, previously blessed status of inventory items has been lost.

2) Equipment turned to dust

This is why it's always recommended to remove non-artifacts before converting altars 
- you don't want to lose those seven league boots or that nifty sword of sharpness, 
do you?

3) Doomed

If the PC had no equipment, dooming rather than equipment turned to dust will occur. 
This is why the PC should have *some* equipment worn, even a si. It will be necessary 
to sacrifice enough to get your piety all the way up to very close, at which time the 
dooming will be removed. It is handy to know how to remove dooming and cursing in any 
case, since these intrinsics can be caused by things other than mistakes with altars 
- robbing shops with lawfuls, attacking karmics in melee and pools spring to mind.

4) The worst two - bolt and summoning

Ordinarily these never occur when mistakes with altars are made. It takes dooming then 
repeated additional prayers for a deity to get this mad. However, there are two 
situations where this will happen *immediately* - falling from champion status and 
sacrificing a gift from your deity. The deity casts an energy bolt at the PC, which, 
strangely enough, the PC seems to be immune to more often than not. The deity is further 
incensed by this and says "DAMN, YOU'LL SUFFER FOR THIS HUMILIATION TOO!" and summons 
creatures dependent on the deity: lawful deity - solars, neutral deity - spectres, 
chaotic diety - greater daemons. The exact sequence of events is dependent upon what 
the PC is doing, praying repeatedly while doomed or falling from champion staus. In the 
former case there may be additional monsters summoned prior to those listed above.

Another case which causes summoning is to get as far as possible from a particular god 
then sacrifice on that god's altar. For instance, if an initially chaotic PC sacrifices 
repeatedly on a neutral altar to achieve very good standing with the neutral god then 
sacrifices on a lawful altar, creatures may be summoned.


0.2.5 Crowning, precrowning and postcrowning

Pre- and postcrowning gives you a random artifact, which will be one of the 
non-guaranteed artifacts. The requirements for pre- and postcrowning are:

* precrowning occurs only if the PC is not of extreme alignment (not L+, N= or C-)
* extremely close
* character level >= 8 + 3 * artifacts generated.

Postcrowning doesn't include the non-extreme alignment restriction.

Note that PCs who achieve precrowning or crowning may never again see the "extremely 
close" status message. In this case, determining whether the PC has sufficient piety 
for further precrownings, crowning or postcrowning is a matter of trial and error. 
This is not as bad as it might seem, since praying uses up very little piety if prayers 
"remain unheard" - that is, the deity does nothing.

These seem to be the most important requirements in 1.0.0 - for instance, the PC may be 
wearing cursed items and the pre- or postcrowning will still occur.

For crowning, the PC must be at extreme alignment and extremely close (or have enough 
piety at very close). The PC must not be intrinsically Cursed or Doomed for any type of 
crowning. Ordinarily, this will never be a problem, since achieving very close status 
removes these intrinsics. However, if the PC is wearing or wielding an item that causes 
Cursing or Dooming (the Crown of Science, Executor, etc.), crowning will not occur. 
Upon crowning, you receive an immunity, an artifact crowning gift which is preselected 
from a list of appropriate items for your race and class (see section 0.2.4.1 below), a 
blessed amulet matching the PC's alignment, a permanent blessing, the ability to convert 
elemental altars for champions of Balance and Order, to wear artifacts and other food 
consumption adding items with less burden on your metabolism and to pray more often.

Note that the immunity received will not be one the PC already has, whether through 
eating appropriate corpses or worn items. For instance, if the PC is wearing the Ring of 
Immunity at crowning time, he will receive no immunity at all - take it off! Likewise, 
the Ancient Mummy Wrapping can be worn or the scorched spear wielded at crowning time to 
ensure the PC does not receive the rather undesirable immunity to cold.

The immunity you receive can be figured out by the message that it gives:

Acid: "You look forward to be digested by Chaos Lords / Lords of Order themselves."
Cold: "You feel prepared for the most chilling tasks."
Fire: "You no longer fear the heat of all hells combined."
Shock: "You feel that neither thunder nor lightning will be able to prevent the 
        success of your mission."

Getting pre- or post-crowned increases the piety required for further pre- or 
post-crownings.

As an example to show how this works quantitatively, Malte Helmert did the following 
research using gold as the sole sacrificial item:

> I made some experiments with a human druid (neutral), got WADOMF and hacked
> a copy of my binary especially for that guy. Went straight to dwarftown,
> don't remember the PC's level. Anyway, I made a series of checks to find out
> the lower bounds on money required. When a certain amount seemed sufficient
> to get to extremely close, I reloaded and tried again with 10,000 less to
> check if it is really minimal.
> 
> Results:
> First crowning took 100,000 gp
> First postcrowning took only 40,000 gp (!)
> Second postcrowning took 180,000 gp
> Third postcrowning took 500,000 gp
> Fourth postcrowning took 970,000 gp
> Fifth postcrowning took 1,600,000 gp.
> Didn't check further, what's the point anyway.
> 
> All postcrownings took place at extremely close, so I wondered if it is
> possible to be crowned/postcrowned at very close. It turned out that this
> was only the case for the second postcrowning, for which then 160,000 gp
> seemed sufficient.
> 
> I also wondered whether there as a difference between saccing 100,000 in one
> go or in ten parts of 10,000 gp. It did not make any difference.
> 
> I then tried to measure the negative impact of praying before being able to
> get crowned (something you occasionally do when you think you should be able
> to get (pre-) crowned though still at very close). It was quite small: If
> I sacced 10,000, then prayed, sacced 10,000, then prayed, and so on, it took
> me 110,000 rather than 100,000 to get crowned. I suppose the cost of praying
> might be higher if your god actually does something, though. In my case the
> prayers simply remained unheard, since I was fully healed etc.
> 
> Last check was with "overflow". If I sac 200,000 rather than 100,000, do the
> extra 100,000 do me any good or is the piety reset to some fixed value after
> crowning? It turned out that you can safely sac more: It gets carried over.
> 
> I did not make quantitative checks, but saccing about 4,000,000 gp (don't
> remember exactly), then praying six times in a row gave me a crowning gift
> and five postcrowning gifts.
> 
> Don't really know if this matters, since by the time you have that money
> (casino and so on), you're normally no longer able to be pre/postcrowned,
> but maybe it's interesting to know all the same.


0.2.5.1 Possible crowning gifts for each class

Note that Dwarves of any class can receive Hammerhead as a crowning gift. Likewise, 
High Elves and Gray elves can receive Sun's Messenger as a crowning gift. This 
research was last verified in gamma 14 by Lee Morgan. In general, there are six 
possible gifts. There are exceptions: see Barbarian, Beastfighter, Mindcrafter, 
Paladin, Thief and Wizard.

Andrew Skalski provided the explanation for this. By examining the g16p2 executable, 
he determined that there are indeed less than six possible crowning gifts for these 
classes. However, the blank spots are filled in with a duplicate of one of the 
possibilities. This means that these classes are twice as likely to receive one of 
the doubled possibilities. The updated table below now reflects these observations. 
The order the artifacts are listed in is alphabetical and has no significance.

ARCHER

1. Boots of the Divine Messenger
2. Farslayer
3. Sun's Messenger
4. Thunderstroke
5. True Aim
6. Whirlwind

ASSASSIN

1. Cloak of Oman
2. Death's Blade
3. Emerald Dagger
4. Executor
5. Farslayer
6. Kinslayer

BARBARIAN

1. Death's Blade
2. Grod
3. Skullcrusher
4. Skullcrusher
5. Vanquisher
6. Vanquisher

BARD

1. Boots of the Divine Messenger
2. Cat's Claw
3. Cloak of Oman
4. Staff of the Wanderer
5. Trusted One
6. Whirlwind

BEASTFIGHTER

1. Boots of the Divine Messenger
2. Bracers of War
3. Cloak of Oman
4. Nature's Companion
5. Nature's Companion
6. Preserver

DRUID

1. Black Thumb
2. Nature's Companion
3. Nature's Friend
4. Purifier
5. Staff of the Wanderer
6. Whirlwind

ELEMENTALIST

1. Brannalbin's Cloak of Defense
2. Iron Crown of Havlor
3. Nature's Friend
4. Ring of Immunity
5. Staff of the Archmagi
6. Staff of the Wanderer

FARMER

1. Hammer of the Gods
2. Long Sting
3. Nature's Friend
4. Shirt of the Saints
5. Skullcrusher
6. Whirlwind

FIGHTER

1. Bracers of War
2. Death's Blade
3. Grod
4. Long Sting
5. Protector
6. Vanquisher

HEALER

1. Brannalbin's Cloak of Defense
2. Preserver
3. Robes of Resistance
4. Shezestriakis
5. Shirt of the Saints
6. Staff of the Wanderer

MERCHANT

1. Boots of the Divine Messenger
2. Crown of Leadership
3. Iron Crown of Havlor
4. Shezestriakis
5. Staff of the Wanderer
6. Trusted One

MINDCRAFTER

1. Brannalbin's Cloak of Defense
2. Iron Crown of Havlor
3. Ring of Immunity
4. Robes of Resistance
5. Robes of Resistance
6. Staff of The Wanderer

MONK

1. Boots of the Divine Messenger
2. Iron Crown of Havlor
3. Ring of Immunity
4. Robes of Resistance
5. Shezestriakis
6. Shirt of the Saints

NECROMANCER

1. Kinslayer
2. Preserver
3. Ring of Immunity
4. Robes of Resistance
5. Staff of the Archmagi
6. Vanquisher

PALADIN

1. Aylas Holy Scarf
2. Hammer of the Gods
3. Justifier
4. Justifier
5. Perion's Plate Mail
6. Trusted One

PRIEST

1. Aylas Holy Scarf
2. Hammer of the Gods
3. Justifier
4. Purifier
5. Shirt of the Saints
6. Skullcrusher

RANGER

1. Boots of the Divine Messenger
2. Bugbiter
3. Nature's Companion
4. Nature's Friend
5. Sun's Messenger
6. True Aim

THIEF

1. Cat's Claw
2. Cloak of Oman
3. Silver Key
4. True Aim
5. Whirlwind
6. Whirlwind

WEAPONSMITH

1. Bracers of War
2. Hammer of the Gods
3. Perion's Plate Mail
4. Protector
5. Ring of Immunity
6. Skullcrusher

WIZARD

1. Brannalbin's Cloak of Defense
2. Ring of Immunity
3. Robes of Resistance
4. Staff of the Archmagi
5. Staff of the Archmagi
6. Staff of the Wanderer


0.2.6 Piety loss

As referred to in the manual, a PC's piety level is determined by the sacrifices made 
to the PC's god. Remember that the value of sacrifices is dependent on a PC's race. 
Piety level constantly decreases with time, so sacrifices made in the early game will 
have little effect after many game turns have passed. In practice, this means that a 
PC who wants to keep his god happy should sacrifice items throughout the game. If a PC 
wants to be (pre- post- or normally) crowned, he should have a very large cache of 
valuable material to sacrifice. This can include live sacrifices, of course, which 
are always valuable.


0.3 Food - preventing starvation


Starvation is often a definite problem for new players. Rest assured that there is enough 
food provided in the game to survive. The easiest source at the start of the game is 
Munxip's food store in Terinyo. He sells primarily large rations, which are heavy at 
200 stones each. These can be useful for training the strength of PCs that start with low 
strength. Food will be found in the various dungeons available from quests assigned in 
Terinyo, and in all dungeons, for that matter. If the PC elects to take Tywat Pare's 
quest to find and kill Kranach and his gang in the wilderness, remember that wilderness 
square are big, take considerable game time to cross, and therefore require much more 
food per game turn than exploring in the dungeons.

Once the PC finishes the area around Terinyo, he will have to cross a large area of 
wilderness to reach the Caverns of Chaos, the main dungeon in the game. The same warning 
about food requirements in the wilderness applies. After reaching the Caverns of Chaos, a 
short descent to the Arena level will provide a very good food source. Ratling traders 
are found on this level, selling various comestibles. The best are cooked lizards. These 
are light at 3 stones each, fairly inexpensive and nutritious. Food problems are 
generally solved at this point.

Most of the corpses that monsters leave are edible. Some are to be avoided. Kobolds of 
any type cause sickness. Rats (simple rats, not giant rats) will make any race other 
than trolls or orcs vomit, but still increase satiation level slightly. Eating humanoid 
corpses, such as goblins, causes the message "This meal does not sit well with you." or 
"You feel uneasy." to be displayed. Several players have tested eating a variety of 
humanoid corpses while wearing the Platinum Girdle, which kills if a chaotic act is 
committed. It never killed the PCs.

Having said that, PC's who have trained the Law skill will receive the message "You feel 
as if transgressing some law." when eating a humanoid corpse, even a lowly goblin. 
However, there is no effect on alignment. This seems to imply that there is a bug 
somewhere in the humanoid corpse-eating code.

Bear in mind that Thomas himself has stated that eating humanoid corpses is not a 
chaotic act.

Dwarves refuse to eat dwarven corpses. They also refuse to eat orc corpses unless they 
are starving. 

Hurthlings refuse to eat black hurthling corpses.

Races other than trolls refuse to eat doppleganger corpses unless starving.

Be aware that some food items are susceptible to rotting. These include corpses of all 
types, apples and pieces of raw meat. Eating rotten food does not cause sickness or other 
negative effects. Food that starts to rot has actually become cursed and will soon 
disappear. Eat it quickly if possible. In the case of corpses, especially strategically 
important ones such as chaos creatures or quicklings, rotting may be indefinitely stopped 
by repeatedly dipping the corpse in holy water when necessary, thus blessing it. Cooked 
corpses decay more slowly than uncooked corpses. Cooked corpses can be created with the 
Cooking skill or by blasting them with fire, from the fire bolt spell, for instance. 
Blessed cooked corpses carried by PCs with Food Preservation at 100 never decay the most 
slowly. This is very handy for preserving the corpses of Chaos Orb guardians (see section 
0.10.2.1.1).

Wearing certain items causes a need for increased food consumption.  This includes all 
items that grant invisibility, artifacts (especially for PC's that are not crowned) and 
worst of all (since they grant no positive effect) amulets of hunger.  Interestingly, 
intrinsics, including intrinsic invisibility, do not have any effect on food consumption.  
Likewise, the Fate Smiles / Lucky / Cursed / Doomed intrinsics have no effect.

The level of satiation is displayed on the screen. High levels of satiation (satiated 
or bloated) will cause a speed decrease.

One type of herb, stomafillia, is extremely filling. Blessed stomafillia will cause 
a PC to be bloated immediately.

The satiation value of food items is increased by 25% for blessed items and decreased by
50% for cursed items.

More quantitative information about satiation levels produced by various food items is 
found in Appendix G Food - complete list.


0.4 Skills - description and usefulness


There is an excellent section in the ADOM manual on skills. Be sure to take advantage 
of it. Some additional tips are provided here. 

Alchemy            - One recipe is gained for each ten points in this skill.  The last 
                     recipe gained at skill level 100 is always for potions of gain 
                     attributes.  The keystroke shift-r brings up the recipe list.  
                     Ingredients can be potions and herbs.  The available recipes are 
                     always for: blindness, booze, cure poison, deafness, extra healing, 
                     gain attributes, insight, longevity, poison and youth.  The order 
                     is random except for gain attributes.
Alertness          - Very helpful for evading bolt spells and undiscovered traps.
Appraising         - Opinions vary.  Cursed items can be rated as good, a nasty surprise.
Archery            - Obvious benefits.
Athletics          - Nice +8 bonus to speed at 100.  Very powerful combination with 
                     Raven birthsign.
Backstabbing       - Very powerful when combined with invisibility.
Bridge Building    - If you must build a bridge it is obviously essential.
Climbing           - Manual omits the fact that this must be at 100 to enter the Rift.  
                     Training with Yergius makes this much easier to achieve.
Concentration      - Critical for wizards and necromancers.  Get this to 100 ASAP.
Cooking            - Useful for preserving the corpse of orb guardians.  
Courage            - Nice to have, some ignore it entirely when going for an ultra ending.
Detect Item Status - Nice but not necessary.
Detect Traps       - Very important unless you can recharge wands of trap detection 
                     indefinitely.  There are several heavily trapped areas in the game.  
                     Very useful for detecting trapped doors as well.  'A'pply this skill 
                     towards any door whose trapped vs untrapped status is unknown.
Disarm Traps       - Nowhere near as important as Detect Traps.  Once detected, traps 
                     are easily avoided.
Dodge              - Very nice DV +10 at skill level 100.
Find Weakness      - Very nice increase to critical hits.
First Aid          - All PCs have this.  Can restore (some) recently lost hit points, but 
                     perhaps more importantly, can be used every turn to fight sickness.  
                     This can be a life saver.  First Aid also works for poisoning.  
                     Apply the skill every time the game generates the message about 
                     "poison coursing through your veins!"
Fletchery          - Wait until skill level is high, ideally 100, to use it.
Food Preservation  - Important for all, essential for necromancers.
Gardening          - For farmers, of course.
Gemology           - Gems are found and some identified solely depending on this skill.  
                     Without it, gems will not be found when mining.  Exploitable.
Haggling           - Somewhat useful for all, essential for merchants.
Healing            - Very important for all PCs.  Get it if you aren't born with it.
Herbalism          - Very useful for all PCs.  Willpower, Toughness and Dexterity all go 
                     to ~25 with herbs.  All herbs picked without this skill will be cursed.
Law                - Marginal.  By the time this skill informs you of the criminal 
                     nature of some act, the PC has already committed it!  Does inform 
                     of lawful acts.
Listening          - All PCs have this.  High skill level may train perception.  Trains 
                     naturally, don't waste level advances on this.
Literacy           - Essential for spellcasters, most of whom are born with high levels 
                     anyway.  Less important than it used to be, since reading scrolls 
                     does not require high literacy.  
Metallurgy         - Essential for weaponsmiths.
Mining             - High level in Mining helps stop pickaxes from breaking.
Music              - Essential for bards, of course.  Very high levels are needed for 
                     good effectivity.
Necromancy         - Necromancers, of course.  Get this to 100 as soon as convenient.  
                     Do not believe the manual about very slow regeneration of mana.  
                     Using the skill trains the mana attribute.
Pick Locks         - Useful for thieves.  Must have thieves' picks.
Pick Pockets       - Useful for all.  Occasionally a truly outstanding object can be 
                     pickpocketed.  Proving the PC a successful pickpocket allows 
                     entrance to the Thieves Guild, a means to receive very useful 
                     training.
Smithing           - Useful for all PCs, the specialty of weaponsmiths.
Stealth            - Useful for all PCs.
Survival           - Useful for all PCs, especially trolls and rangers.  All PCs born in the 
                     month of he Falcon receive this.  Applying the skill while Bloated on a 
                     non-water square causes plant seeds to be gathered, which have some 
                     nutritional value and can be given to farmers for a small lawful boost.  
                     Doing the same on a water square causes fish to be gathered, which can 
                     be used to tame a variety of monsters (see Section 0.11.1.3).
Swimming           - Nearly essential for all PCs in later gammas and 1.0.0 that include 
                     rivers (at least those without a means of casting Frost Bolt).
Tactics            - Useful for all PCs, increases modifiers from the tactics settings.
Two Weapon Combat  - Useful for all PCs.  Two words:  Needle.  Sting.
Ventriloquism      - Opinions vary.  A means of confusing monsters.
Woodcraft          - Nearly essential if the PC is going to chop trees.


0.4.1 Guaranteed ways of acquiring skills

The following skills can be taught, or trained by Yrrigs and Yergius, providing 
alignment restrictions are met (see section 0.2.1).

Backstabbing      - Bart
Bridge Building   - Yrrigs
Climbing          - Yergius
Courage           - the Old Barbarian
Detect Traps      - Yergius
Disarm Traps      - Yergius
Gardening         - Guth'Alak (under special circumstances, see section 1.2.1.6)
Healing           - Jharod
Healing           - Kranf Niest
Herbalism         - Guth'Alak
Law               - Tywat Pare
Literacy          - Thrundarr
Pick Locks        - Yergius
Pick Pockets      - Yergius
Smithing          - Glod
Stealth           - Yergius
Swimming          - Blup
Tactics           - Bart
Two Weapon Combat - Bart


0.4.2 Non-guaranteed ways of acquiring skills

Potions of education can grant a new random skill or increase proficiency in an 
existing random skill. Skills can also be wished for; the exceptions are Alertness 
and Healing.

0.4.3 Training skills

In the sense meant for the sake of the following table, "training" means actions that will 
cause a skill to spontaneously increase, *without* the player deciding to increase skill 
proficiency when gaining an experience level. This is different from Yergius' training, 
which can change the potential maximum for a skill (how high the PC can raise it) and the 
dice roll (how fast the PC can get it there). The value of Yergius' training can only be 
taken advantage of when gaining an experience level or after successfully applying the skill 
elsewhere in the game. 

Skill                  Training method
=====                  ===============

Alchemy                successfully applying
Alertness              spontaneously discovering a trap (not using the Detect Traps skill) or evading 
                       a spellcaster's bolts
Appraising             evaluating many items
Archery                using missiles (apparently including scurgari and boomerangs but not other thrown 
                       missiles) and *only* when successfully firing a missile into the red zone
Athletics              automatic
Backstabbing           attacking unsuspecting monsters due to invisibility, Stealth or a nonhostile 
                       monster - always results in the message "You stab the -foo-..." or "You splatter 
                       the -foo-..."
Bridge Building        successfully applying
Climbing               mountaineering, climbing out of pits
Concentration          regenerating power points
Cooking                successfully applying
Courage                fighting more than one opponent
Detect Item Status     evaluating many items
Detect Traps           successfully detecting traps, whether the skill is applied or with the search 
                       command
Disarm Traps           successfully disarming traps
Dodge                  successfully dodging spells and missiles
Find Weakness          when the PC scores a critical hit "...with full force" *unless* this is due to a 
                       slaying weapon
First Aid              applying, even if unsuccessful
Fletchery              successfully applying
Food Preservation      carrying corpses or other food items susceptible to rotting, probably by killing 
                       monsters as well
Gardening              successfully applying
Gemology               whenever the PC or a monster destroys rock; the game checks whether a gem is 
                       generated
Haggling               successfully applying
Healing                automatic when wounded
Herbalism              successfully identifying an herb bush
Law                    whenever the PC receives the PC receives the "You feel as if {behaving in proper 
                       form|transgressing some law}." messages
Listening              automatic when sounds are present
Literacy               reading spellbooks, gravestones, fortune cookies and (at least non-magical, if 
                       not all) scrolls
Metallurgy             evaluating many items; may also be trained when the PC is on a level where 
                       digging is occuring (determining whether ore is present, and which type)
Mining                 mining, i.e. only using pickaxes against stone
Music                  when a monster is successfully tamed using the skill
Necromancy             successfully applying + level dependent for necromancers
Pick Locks             successfully applying
Pick Pockets           successfully applying
Smithing               successfully applying + special considerations for weaponsmiths
Stealth                automatic
Survival               successfully applying
Swimming               moving through water: dungeon rivers, wilderness water squares, Shyssiryxius' 
                       cave
Tactics                fighting with tactics settings other than normal and switching often
Two weapon combat      successful hits when dual-wielding melee weapons
Ventriloquism          successfully applying
Woodcraft              automatic when traveling through forest squares in the wilderness or animated 
                       forest; also by attacking trees in the animated forest


0.5 Spells and Mindcraft

Spells - description and usefulness

There is a very good section on spells including damage and range in the ADOM manual. 
The diameter of ball spells is dependent upon Willpower / 8. However, this diameter 
only increases as a multiple of sixteen since ball spells radiate symmetrically; the 
minimum diameter is two.  Therefore getting Willpower to 24, for instance, does not 
increase the diameter.  Willpower must be increased to 32 for the diameter to increase 
to four, 48 for the diameter to increase to six, 64 for the diameter to increase to 
eight, etc.

Note that spells become more costly to cast (in terms of PP) as the number of 
available castings decreases. Thus a spell will increase in cost as the number 
of available castings decreases below 100 or so, becoming very noticeable as 
the number drops below about 20.  This is class dependent but will affect all 
classes to differing extents.  Note also that the number of available castings 
is not a simple "decrement by one each time the spell is cast" type of formula.  
Again depending on class, the difficulty of casting the spell and probably other 
factors this will vary.  For example, casting Light with 1000 castings available 
to a level 40 wizard may decrease the available castings by one, while casting 
Death Ray with 20 castings available with a level 30 archer may reduce the 
available castings to zero.  These are purely hypothetical examples but should 
give an idea of the trends.

Some general remarks about spells: Ball spells are extraordinarily useful since no 
monsters shrug them off. They are wonderful when the PC is surrounded, of course. It is 
worth switching to Coward tactics and waiting to be completely surrounded before casting. 
Since they are relatively costly in terms of PP, it is useful to destroy the maximum 
number of enemies with each casting. Fire magic is particularly effective against 
cold-based creatures and undead including mummies. Cold magic is particularly effective 
against fire-based creatures. Bless damages undead. Healing spells can be cast at 
monsters including companions (but don't use them on slaves!). Wish is a unique spell. 
It is very difficult to learn, probably impossible if the PC has teleportitis. Such PC's 
must travel to a location where teleportation is impossible, such as the the Assassin's 
Guild, the Tomb of the High Kings or the elemental temples (the desirability is in that 
order due to background corruption in all of those locations). Furthermore, PC's will 
usually reach Starving! status while attempting to learn Wish. Tactics to deal with this 
include eating a blessed stomfillia to become Bloated, waiting just until the PC returns 
to Satiated, then eating another blessed stomfillia. It may be necessary to drink 
additional satiating potions, such as potions of toughness or potential toughness, even 
when the double blessed stomafillia tactic is used. Alternatively, PC's without 
teleportitis can use a room that has the "rich flavour" special effect, where PC's will 
never become hungry. Wish is extraordinarly expensive to cast and also drains a random 
stat by -10 when cast. If the PC must cast it, be prepared for the stat drain. Plan to 
cast it in a special room that lowers spell costs, and on Silvernight or Darknight, if 
possible, according to the PC's alignment.

A simple list. A = arcane, C = clerical.

Acid Ball / Rain Of Sorrow (A)
Acid Bolt (A,C)
Bless (C)
Burning Hands / Baptism of Fire (A,C)
Calm Monster (A,C)
Create Item / Divine Favour (A,C)
Cure Critical Wounds (C)
Cure Disease (C)
Cure Light Wounds (C)
Cure Serious Wounds (C)
Darkness (A,C)
Death Ray / Greater Divine Touch (A,C)
Destroy Undead / Dispel Undead (C)
Disarm Trap (C)
Earthquake (C)
Farsight (A,C)
Fire Bolt / Hellish Flames (A,C)
Fireball / Major Punishment (A)
Frost Bolt / Nether Bolt (A,C)
Greater Identify / Greater Enlightment (A,C)
Heal (C)
Ice Ball / Freezing Fury (A)
Identify / Enlightenment (A,C)
Improved Fireball / Invoked Devastation (A)
Invisibility / Veil Of The Gods (A)
Knock / Divine Key (A)
Know Alignment (C)
Light (A,C)
Lightning Ball / Heavenly Fury (A)
Lightning Bolt / Divine Wrath (A,C)
Magic Lock / Seal of the Spheres (A)
Magic Map / Knowledge of the Ancients (A,C)
Magic Missile / Minor Punishment (A)
Mystic Shovel / Divine Digger (A,C)
Neutralize Poison (C)
Petrification (C)
Remove Curse (A,C)
Revelation (C)
Scare Monster / Holy Awe (A,C)
Slow Monster (A)
Slow Poison (C)
Strength Of Atlas / Lordly Might (A)
Stun Ray / Lesser Divine Touch (A,C)
Summon Monsters (A,C)
Teleportation / Ethereal Bridge (A)
Web (A)
Wish / Divine Intervention

Mindcraft
Malte Helmert contributed the following table regarding Mindcraft: 
Level TPC COB COW MBL MSH MWV TBL EOM GMB GTB REG TPS TPO GMW
    1 N/A   8
    2 N/A   8
    3 N/A   7  24
    4 N/A   7  24
    5 N/A   7  24
    6 N/A   6  23  18
    7 N/A   6  23  18
    8 N/A   6  23  18
    9 N/A   5  22  17 5/T
   10 N/A   5  22  17 4/T
   11 N/A   5  22  17 4/T
   12 N/A   4  21  16 4/T
   13 N/A   4  21  16 4/T  47
   14 N/A   4  21  16 4/T  46
   15 N/A   3  20  15 3/T  45  30
   16 N/A   3  20  15 3/T  44  28
   17 N/A   3  20  15 3/T  43  26
   18 N/A   3  19  14 3/T  42  24   6
   19 N/A   3  19  14 3/T  41  22   6
   20 N/A   3  19  14 2/T  40  20   6
   21 N/A   3  18  13 2/T  39  18   5
   22 N/A   3  18  13 2/T  38  18   5
   23 N/A   3  18  13 2/T  37  18   5
   24 N/A   3  17  12 2/T  36  18   4
   25 N/A   3  17  12 2/T  35  18   4  27
   26 N/A   3  17  12 2/T  34  18   4  27
   27 N/A   3  16  11 2/T  33  18   3  26
   28 N/A   3  16  11 2/T  32  18   3  26
   29 N/A   3  16  11 2/T  31  18   3  26
   30 N/A   3  15  10 2/T  30  18   3  25  60
   31 N/A   3  15  10 2/T  29  18   3  25  58
   32 N/A   3  15  10 2/T  28  18   3  25  56
   33 N/A   3  14   9 2/T  27  18   3  24  54
   34 N/A   3  14   9 2/T  26  18   3  24  52
   35 N/A   3  14   9 2/T  25  18   3  24  50 5/T
   36 N/A   3  13   8 2/T  24  18   3  23  48 5/T
   37 N/A   3  13   8 2/T  23  18   3  23  46 5/T
   38 N/A   3  13   8 2/T  22  18   3  23  44 5/T
   39 N/A   3  12   7 2/T  21  18   3  22  42 5/T
   40 N/A   3  12   7 2/T  20  18   3  22  40 4/T  35
   41 N/A   3  12   7 2/T  19  18   3  22  38 4/T  35
   42 N/A   3  11   6 2/T  18  18   3  21  36 4/T  35
   43 N/A   3  11   6 2/T  17  18   3  21  34 4/T  35
   44 N/A   3  11   6 2/T  16  18   3  21  32 4/T  35
   45 N/A   3  10   5 2/T  15  18   3  20  30 4/T  35  35
   46 N/A   3  10   5 2/T  15  18   3  20  28 4/T  35  35
   47 N/A   3  10   5 2/T  15  18   3  20  26 4/T  35  35
   48 N/A   3   9   5 2/T  15  18   3  19  25 4/T  35  35
   49 N/A   3   9   5 2/T  15  18   3  19  25 4/T  35  35
   50 N/A   3   9   5 2/T  15  18   3  19  25 3/T  35  35  50

N/A: this is for free
x/T: x PP per turn

TPC - Teleport Control
COB - Confusion Blast
COW - Confusion Wave
MBL - Mind Blast
MSH - Mental Shield
MWV - Mind Wave
TBL - Telekinetic Blast
EOM - Eyes of the Mind
GMB - Greater Mental Blast
GTB - Greater Telekinetic Blast
REG - Regeneration
TPS - Teleport Self
TPO - Teleport Other
GMW - Greater Mental Wave


0.6 Stats

Stats are referred to as Attributes in the ADOM manual. A basic description of them can 
be found there. The current value for stats is displayed on the main game screen. The 
current value and the potential maximum value for the PC's stats can be found on the 
screen shown by the '@' command.

Stats can increase or decrease for many reasons, some of which are detailed below. When 
a stat changes, the following messages are generated:

                                       Stat changes

           Increases                       Stat                            Decreases

 Your muscles feel stronger              Strength                            Your muscles soften
 You feel studious                       Learning                  Thinking seems to get tougher
 Your will seems inflexible             Willpower                          You feel soft-hearted
 Your movements are getting swifter     Dexterity                          You are getting shaky
 Your health increases                  Toughness           It seems that you are getting a cold
 You feel very self-confident            Charisma                              You feel reserved
 Your looks improve                     Appearance                        You are growing a wart
 You feel more in touch with the world     Mana     You are getting out of touch with everything
 Your senses sharpen                    Perception               You seem to get less perceptive


0.6.1 Increasing stats

It is to any PC's advantage to raise stats to the potential maximum and beyond. There are 
several ways to do this. Stats may be increased to their potential maximum naturally by 
exercising the stat.


0.6.1.1 Exercising stats naturally

Examples of how to exercise stats naturally:

Strength - carrying around an inventory heavy enough to cause the PC to become Burdened 
           or Strained will exercise the Strength stat. The downside is that carrying 
           those heavy loads will make the PC slower. Being Strained and especially 
           Strained! for too long probably abuses the Dexterity stat.

Learning - reading scrolls and spellbooks trains Learning

Willpower - no known way to exercise naturally

Dexterity - no known way to exercise naturally

Toughness - Toughness increases probably occur faster if the PC is avoids Hungry and 
            Starving status

Charisma - no known way to exercise naturally

Appearance - no known way to exercise naturally

Mana - casting spells and creating undead slaves exercises the Mana stat

Perception - no known way to exercise naturally

Note that all physical (St, Dx, To) stat increases are liable to be faster when they are 
low and the PC is gaining experience levels relatively quickly. The Athletics skill also 
helps raise physical stats more quickly and has a small effect on Appearance.


0.6.1.2 Training with Garth

The dwarven weaponmaster Garth, found in Dwarftown, can be paid to increase stats other 
than Appearance and Mana. The formula for how much to pay is $100 * stat value, doubled 
once for each 5 points over 15. This is a general formula that may vary according to the 
PC's race.

See section 2.5.5 for a bit more detail on training with Garth.


0.6.1.3 Training stats with herbs

Two of the herbs can be used in order to increase stats to a maximum of about 25 (27 has 
been observed) per stat. These are:

Morgia root - toughness and willpower (eat)

Eating 2 morgia roots, any status, will train toughness. Eating 4 morgia roots, any 
status, will also train willpower. If the stats are already at their potential 
maximum, 8 morgia roots are required.  Eating more than 8 at once is a waste of morgia 
roots.

Moss of mareilon - dexterity (use)

Using 2 blessed or uncursed mosses of mareilon trains dexterity. If the dexterity stat 
is already at its potential maximum, 4 mosses of mareilon are required. Using more than 
4 at once is a waste of moss of mareilon.  Using cursed mosses of mareilon abuses the 
dexterity stat.

In any case, do not eat or use additional herbs until the stat increases have taken 
effect - this may take a while.  Note that training stats in this way is more 
effective when the stats are low.  Eating four morgia, for instance, may cause two or 
three increases in willpower and toughness if the stats are in the single digits.  
Once above ten, the stat increases seem to occur one point at a time.

As with training with Garth, there may be variations on this based on race.  
For instance, it seems that trolls always require double the dosages 
described above.


0.6.1.4 Increasing stats by eating corpses

Many corpses have an affect on stats. Some simply increase a given stat, others will 
increase one stat while decreasing another. Some have a limit, that is, they will only 
increase a stat to a certain number, after which they will have no effect. Others 
affect stats regardless of their value.

The effects will be compiled here eventually. Until then you can browse Appendix J 
for the effects resulting from eating monster corpses.


0.6.1.5 Increasing stats with potions

There are five kinds of potions that increase or decrease the PC's stats directly: 
potions of -stat-, potions of potential -stat-, potions of boost -stat-, potions of 
gain attributes and potions of carrot juice. Rearranging stats is dealt with below.

Potions of -stat- behave as follows:

uncursed potion of -stat-: an uncursed potion of -stat- will increase the value of 
                           -stat- by one, and increases the potential maximum plus one

blessed potion of -stat- : a blessed potion of -stat- will increase the value of -stat- 
                           by two, and increases the potential maximum plus two

cursed potion of -stat- : a cursed potion of -stat- will decrease the value of -stat- by 
                          one, and decreases the potential maximum by one

Potions of potential -stat- do the same with your stat potential, which determines the 
natural maximum of your PC in that stat.

Potions of boost -stat- work like potions of -stat-, but give a bigger boost that
is *temporary*. These are useful when you need to get some stat over a certain
limit, such as the Wi: 32 border that allows for bigger ball spells.  Another useful 
application is to use potions of boost learning just before a level increase, which 
will probably boost learning enough to increase the number of skill increases 
allowed. 

Potions of gain attributes raise the value of a single stat by one if uncursed or all 
stats by one if blessed. Note that they do not raise potential maximums. They only 
increase potential maximums to the resulting value of -stat-, when necessary.

Potions of carrot juice can be used to increase Perception. Drinking a blessed potion of 
carrot juice will increase Perception by +1. Drinking an uncursed potion of carrot juice 
may increase Perception if the Pe score is very low; this needs to be tested. There is a 
special room effect "The air of this room is filled with the smell of carrots." which 
will cause a one-time +5 increase to Perception when a blessed or uncursed potion of 
carrot juice is consumed while in the room.


0.6.1.6 Crystals of knowledge

'U'sing crystals of knowledge has two possible effects: if the crystal is 
uncursed, a bit of the level layout around the PC is revealed.  If the 
crystal is blessed, a +1 (sometimes +2) increase to the Learning stat also 
occurs.  In ADOM 1.0.0+, there is a limit similar to that encountered with 
herbs: Learning cannot be increased beyond 25 - 27 or so with blessed crystals 
of knowledge.


0.6.2 Rearranging stats


0.6.2.1 Potions of exchange

Drinking a potion of exchange changes your stats, not taking into account any effects 
from corruption or equipment. A cursed potion of exchange swaps six stats randomly, 
an uncursed one twists five, and a blessed one swaps two stats around.

0.6.2.2 Potions of balance

Potions of balance can be very, very helpful if you know how to use them. When you drink 
one, the game calculates the average of all of your stats, rounds it down, and adds a 
number depending on the potion's status. For a blessed potion, it's +3, uncursed 0, and 
cursed -3. The stat changes are based on this final score.

If a stat exceeds this score, it's lowered by one. If it's below this, it's raised by 
one. If it's equal, it remains unchanged.

Therefore, if you have a well-rounded character, with most or all stat scores close to 
each other and drink a blessed potion of balance, you will get a boost to most or all 
stats.

Potions of balance have a limit analgous to herbs in ADOM 1.0.0+: stats cannot 
be increased over ~25 using potions of balance.  There is also another effect 
in ADOM 1.0.0+: alignment moves towards neutrality when drinking a potion of 
balance.

Note also that potions of balance take into account all stat-modifying elements including 
worn equipment, wielded equipment and corruptions.


0.7 Weapon skills


A general description of weapon skills can be found in the ADOM manual.

In general, a PC with higher Strength will do more damage with a given weapon. There 
seems to be one important exception to this: whips. As implemented in ADOM, the damage 
done with whips, especially dual-wielded whips, seems to be more dependent on Dexterity 
than Strength. The manual touches on this subject, stating that a PC must have high 
speed to use two whips effectively. Dexterity seems to be at least as important.


0.7.1 Jack of all trades or master of one?

This is a matter of personal preference and style. The advantage of becoming very 
proficient with one weapon becomes clear from reading the manual: bonuses to the to-hit 
and to-damage as well as reduced attack cost when using the weapon. There is also the 
possibility of achieving Grand Mastery, where the attack cost is reduced to the point 
where about 1 1/2 attacks per round is possible. The downside is also easy to imagine: 
without an artifact weapon in the specialized category, a PC can have the weapon 
destroyed and be without one. In practice this is not usually a problem since there are 
generally plenty of weapons to be found in the game. Also, a PC may run across a truly 
outstanding weapon at some point in the game, some of which are guaranteed, and have no 
skill with the weapon. Again, this is not usually a huge problem since mid- to high-level 
PC's will be able to train up their weapon skill in any given category relatively quickly.


0.7.2 Class considerations - what weapon to specialize in

Beastfighters - Beastfighters receive severe penalties for using melee weapons, and 
                should avoid doing so for this reason. They develop a formidable unarmed 
                attack as they advance in experience and Unarmed Combat skill. Note that 
                the penalty does not apply to missile weapons; all beastfighters should 
                practice with missile weapons in order to take advantage of -foo- slaying 
                ammunition.

Mindcrafters - Willpower is critical for Mindcrafters. The Sword of Nonnak is a 
               guaranteed artifact sword available to most PCs at experience level 15 or 
               less. It grants +5 to Willpower. This makes Swords an attractive weapon 
               class for Mindcrafters to specialize in, at least during the early game.

Monks - Monks also receive penalties for using weapons, albeit not as severe as 
        Beastfighters, and so should specialize in Unarmed Combat. Monks also excel at 
        kicking and receive a class power that enables them to deliver a circular kick.


0.7.3 Achieving Grand Mastery

Grand Mastery is difficult to achieve. It will not happen simply from using a single 
weapon type throughout a normal game. Becoming doomed in the wilderness for the frequent 
wilderness encounters is one way of generating an infinite number of enemies to be killed 
with no corruption. The Crown of Science (doubly useful because of its +9 bonus to Le) or 
a ring of doom can be used for this.

There is one class + starsign combination that can reasonably expect to achieve Grand 
Mastery during a normal game. Note the following two manual entries:

From the Weapon Skills section:

Farmers are so skilled in the use of polearms that they need 20% less marks to increase 
in their use.

From the Horoscope section:

Sword
*****
Positive modifiers from Tactics settings are increased by 10%, costs to increase melee 
weapon skills are reduced by 20%, +1 to the initial Learning score.

This double 20% reduction in cost to increase weapon skills means that farmers born in the 
month of the Sword who use polearms exclusively, and do not hurry, can expect to achieve 
Grand Mastery with polearms. This will happen approximately by the time the PC reaches the 
Mana Temple, depending on the ending the PC is going for, etc.


0.8 Armor considerations


0.8.1 DV versus PV

As everyone knows for reading the ADOM manual, DV is an abbreviation 
for Defensive Value and PV is an abbreviation for Protection Value.  
The former determines how hard it is for an opponent to hit the PC; 
the latter determines how much damage is absorbed by a PC's armor if 
a monster makes a successful hit.  In recent gammas of ADOM, there 
has been a tendency for monsters to score more critical hits which 
bypass PV.  Some monsters *always* bypass PV, notably claw bugs, 
which make them very annoying opponents for low level characters.  
Note also that non-artifact armor can be damaged by monster attacks, 
lowering its Protection Value especially and eventually destroying it.

So the question arises, which is better, a high DV or a high PV?  
As with the question of whether to specialize in one weapon or become 
proficient with many weapons, it is largely a matter of personal 
preference and style.  There are successful players who use both 
approaches.  In practice, it is possible to raise DV to the point 
where none other than the very highest level monsters can hit the PC.  
A DV over 100 means very few monsters will hit the PC successfully.  
However, a DV this high is not available to any but the very high 
level characters that specifically pursue it.  Likewise, a PV over 
100 means few monsters can hurt the PC, since the vast majority do 
not deal over 100 points of damage in one round.  Bear in mind, 
however: 1) the possibility of critical hits and 2) the possibility 
of running into something very nasty, such as balors, Greater Molochs 
and the Emperor Moloch which certainly *do* deal over 100 points of 
damage per round.

A general rule of thumb?  Add up the DV and PV bonuses.  A [-3, +5] 
iron chain mail is about as good as a [+0, +2] leather armor (and the 
latter is lighter and won't rust).  Few non-artifact armors can compete 
with an average eternium plate mail at [-1, +13].  Dragon scale mails 
averaging [-2, +11] are also extremely desirable armors since they 
grant immunity to the element corresponding to the dragon the armor is 
derived from.  On the DV side, few non-artifact items can compare to 
eternium tower shields averaging [+16, +6].  Dragon scale mails and 
eternium tower shields are so powerful that many players will use a 
wish on these items.

The debate over DV versus PV is one that will never be settled, which 
is as it should be.  ;-)


0.9 Killing monsters


0.9.1 The significance of the first kill

Many new ADOM players are dismayed to find that they need to know what monster their 
PC killed first. By the time they find this out, they have forgotten, of course. Write 
it down, rename your PC to reflect your first kill, do anything necessary to remember 
that first kill. It is very important, especially if you are going to attempt an ultra 
ending.


0.9.1.1 The Courage skill

There is a description of the Courage skill in the ADOM manual. It is worthwhile to 
acquire it, although many players ignore it and have finished the game without it. The 
skill is obtained by finishing the Old Barbarian's quest: kill an additional score (20) 
of the monster your PC first killed. Note that the Old Barbarian will not give the quest 
to PCs who have chaotic alignment.


0.9.1.2 The Filk quest

The Filk quest is for very advanced players attempting an ultra ending. The quest 
objective is to find and kill the named quickling bard Filk. He can be found in the 
Infinite Dungeon on the level number corresponding to the number of first-kill monsters 
the PC has killed. This will of course be a minimum of 21 if the PC has acquired the 
Courage skill. It can also change during the quest if the PC kills additional first-kill 
monsters after being assigned the quest. See section 4.3.1.1 for more about the Filk 
quest.


0.9.1.3 Strategy for the first kill: where and what?

There are many schools of thought on what the first kill should be. If the PC wants to 
acquire the Courage skill quickly after being assigned the Old Barbarian's quest, the 
monsters should be readily available. If the PC also plans to do the Filk quest later in 
the game, the total number of first-killed monsters killed must be minimized in order to 
prevent a tedious and dangerous dive into the Infinite Dungeon. Some experienced players 
will ignore the Old Barbarian's quest for the Courage skill. This makes it very easy to 
complete the Filk quest, since if the player has chosen wisely the PC will have killed 
only one of the monsters in question. Some players choose to make the first kill in 
Lawenilothehl for this reason. Muggers, for instance, are found only in Lawenilothehl and 
the Assassins' Guild. Skriek, the ratling found in Lawenilothehl, is the only cloaked 
ratling in the game (although killing him means the PC can no longer buy keys from him, 
which can save the PC's life). Hotzenplotz, who is also located in Lawenilothehl, is the 
only crime lord in the game. He is not easy for an experience level one PC to kill, but 
it can be done with wizards who have a good offensive bolt spell (not Magic Missile), or 
hurthling archers who start the game with level five skill in thrown rocks. Hotzenplotz's 
guardians Grunge and Munge are likewise the only two half-orc bouncers in the game.

If the PC wants the Courage skill and wants to attempt an ultra ending, the following 
requirements must be met: the first kill must be a monster readily available after 
receiving the Old Barbarian's quest; it must also be uncommon in the various dungeons 
the PC will face so that the Filk quest does not get out of control. Entering the Small 
Cave at the start of the game and killing a rat, kobold or goblin as the first kill, for 
instance, makes it much more difficult to finish an ultra ending.


0.9.2 Cats - the significance of felines

There are three types of monsters that count as cats in ADOM: cave lions, cave tigers 
and wild cats.

The Cat Lord resides on D: 35 in the Caverns of Chaos.  He rewards PCs who have 
avoided killing any cats with a powerful artifact ring.  He will be hostile 
towards PCs that have killed cats and becomes more powerful with each cat killed. 

Many players consider the Ring of the Master Cat to be the most powerful and desirable 
ring in the game. It grants +16 to Dexterity and +16 to speed. In addition it causes the 
PC to deliver considerably more critical hits with melee and missile weapons and grants 
the Fate Smiles intrinsic.

It is important to remember that even after receiving the ring, the PC must not kill any 
cats while wearing it, since it explodes in that circumstance.  The ring does not explode 
if it is in the backpack or left on another level when a cat is killed after receiving 
the RotMC.

Make no mistake about it, the requirement to kill no cats for the entire game is a 
difficult one, causing many to refer to them as "those damn cats." The power of the ring 
makes it worthwhile to attempt to avoid killing them.

There are several ways to deal with cats.  Teleportation is one, from a wand or spell.  
Either teleport the cat away, especially if the PC does not have teleport control, or 
teleport the PC.  Potions of exchange thrown at a cat will turn it into another monster.  
Potions of raw chaos, available at any time once the PC has Moon Sickle, will turn cats 
into writhing masses of primal chaos when thrown at cats. Cats can be led over traps 
until they are killed or turned into a writhing mass of primal chaos.  Luring a cat 
across an alarm trap causes other monsters to become hostile and attack the cat. Note 
that in newer versions of ADOM, the PC is charged with killing a cat if he creates or 
sets off a trap that kills a cat. Wands of destruction can be used to safely kill cats 
since monsters "destroyed" in this way do not appear in the kill list.

PCs that are near Dwarftown can bring cats to Dwarftown and have the Priest, for instance, 
kill them.  This is probably a bit dangerous, since bringing hostile monsters into 
Dwarftown repeatedly may eventually result in some of the inhabitants becoming hostile.  
It should also be possible for PCs near the Banshee's level to bring cats to her level and 
have her wail kill them. Additional monsters that can be used include vortices.  Lure a 
cat close enough to one and allow it to explode. Be familiar with vortices before trying 
this.

Companions can kill cats for you. Cave lions and wild cats can be tamed with rat and/or 
giant rat corpses, if you have enough of them. Cave tigers can eventually be tamed with 
pieces of fresh and/or raw meat, but it requires five or more pieces. If the PC can become 
invisible, and has not attacked the cat in question, it can simply be walked away from. 
Cats can be confused with the Ventriloquism skill. While they are confused, run away. 
Cats can probably be confused or blinded by throwing potions of confusion or blindness at 
them. Again the run away tactic would be used.


0.9.3 Karmic beings

Karmic monsters come in three main varieties: karmic lizards, karmic dragons and ancient 
karmic dragons. They can be identified by the fact that they change color with each turn. 
Be very careful if the PC encounters a lizard with the 'w'alk command. It may allow the 
PC to wind up right next to the lizard, in which case you may not have time to notice the 
color change. Karmics demand caution because attacking them in melee causes the PC to 
lose the Fate Smiles intrinsic, then the Lucky intrinsic followed by cursing then dooming 
if the PC continues. This is not a 100% guaranteed effect. PCs can kill karmics in one 
hit and not suffer the consequences. However, it happens so often that karmics should not 
be engaged in melee if it is possible to avoid it. Killing them with magic, missiles, 
mindcraft or companions is the way to dispatch them. The changing color of karmics 
reflects the nature of karmic dragons. They breathe not one element, like ordinary 
dragons, but have *all* the breath attacks available, varying from turn to turn depending 
on their color. This also means that they are immune to all elemental magical attacks. 
Unfortunately karmic dragon scale mail is not available in the game. ;-) They are 
vulnerable to dragon slaying ammo.

There are such things as karmic wyrms. There is one guaranteed in the game. Thankfully, 
he is not initially hostile. Another being shares the cursing/dooming property of 
karmics: Filk, the quickling bard.

Karmic beings will occasionally leave corpses when killed.  Eating the corpse 
of a karmic being will, in order, remove the doomed intrinsic if present, remove 
the cursed intrinsic if present, grant the Lucky intrinsic if not present and 
grant the Fate Smiles intrinsic if not present.  Remember all or any of these 
intrinsics can be present simultaneously.  Thus a PC that is doomed and Lucky 
would lose the doomed intrinsic and retain the Lucky intrinsic after eating a 
karmic corpse.  The same is true for a PC that has the cursed and doomed 
intrinsics - the PC would lose the doomed intrinsic but not the cursed intrinsic 
and would not gain either the Lucky or Fate Smiles intrinsics.


0.9.4 Strategies for dealing with particularly annoying monsters

Suggestions for more annoying monsters are welcome. No uniques, though - they are dealt 
with in the section pertaining to their location.

This section is about *annoying* monsters. Not necessarily very dangerous or 
life-threatening, just monsters that are your personal pet peeve with some attack or 
characteristic that infuriates you.

Early game: 

claw bugs - Since claw bugs always ignore PV (luckily, they never damage armor) and 
            there are almost no wearable items substantially increasing DV at this 
            point in the game, fighting them in true berserker mode - wearing nothing 
            and switching tactics to berserker (see section 0.14.12) might be 
            worthwhile.  In this mode, there are good bonuses to to-hit and to-damage 
            values - usually enough to take them out in one hit.  Of course, this is 
            not necessary once the PC has some missiles and/or spells to take them out.  
            Note that claw bugs are immune to mindcraft as are all insects. They are 
            very fragile and pose a threat only due to their numerous (8 per turn!) 
            armor-punching attacks.

ghuls - They are only dangerous because of their paralyzation ability. Otherwise easy 
        to kill. PCs with halfway decent DV should not have a problem.

jellies - Jellies can be troublesome due to several of their attacks - sickness, acid, 
          poison, paralyzation, etc. Gray oozes and ochre jellies will corrode weapons 
          made of iron, mithril and adamantium or damage the PC with their acidic attacks 
          when fighting unarmed. Mithril and adamantium weapons are more resistant to 
          corrosion, but it will happen eventually - do not attempt to clear a jelly pit 
          in melee with weapons made of iron (especially), mithril or adamantium. This 
          can be problematic for a low level PC. Spells or missiles are preferable, but 
          if a low level PC must melee these critters, stone weapons are a good choice 
          since they do not corrode. Alternatively, the PC can wield a si and bash the 
          jelly with it. As an artifact, the si cannot be damaged.

          Gelatinous cubes can be particularly annoying because of their ability to 
          destroy items that are lying on the ground. Losing that waterproof blanket in 
          the SMC to one of these ugly blobs is extremely frustrating. Easily killed with 
          missiles, spells and mindcraft (!?).

          One of the nastier jellies is the stone ooze. The paralysis attack of these can 
          be very, very nasty for PC's who have no means of paralyzation resistance (such 
          as an amulet of free action). Attack them from a distance or run away.

Midgame:

dopplegangers - These are frustrating because they deflect missiles and cause 
                confusion.  Doppleganger lords are somewhat more dangerous.  
                Doppleganger kings are exceptionally dangerous even for very 
                experienced PCs: they reflect the nature of the PC exactly in terms of 
                DV and PV and may inflict substantially more damage than the PC is 
                capable of dealing.  Their speed is also nearly identical to the PC's 
                although movement cost and hitpoints are not copied.  Normal 
                dopplegangers are easily killed with spells or mindcraft.

Dorn beasts - Annoying because of their constant paralysis attack. An amulet of free 
              action will solve this problem. Less well known is the tactic of attacking 
              them in darkness or while blind.

mimics - These annoying creatures can appear in a shop when the player is least expecting 
         it (although they do not seem to show up in Terinyo or Lawenilothehl, thankfully, 
         they *do* appear in the HMV shop - a warning for players that elect to descend 
         through the UD to start the game). By the time the PC encounters them, they can 
         generally be killed; they are simply surprising and startling. One is almost 
         guaranteed in Waldenbrook's shop. Note that tension rooms full of mimics, master 
         mimics and mimic hiveminds are much more dangerous than a single mimic in a shop.

rust monsters - These beasts will rust the PC's vulnerable armor and weapons. Extremely 
                annoying, since all they have to do is touch the PC and a perfectly 
                functioning sword of sharpness or phase dagger can be reduced to a useless 
                hunk of metal. They can be pacified by throwing metal items at them. 
                Quarrels are a good choice if the PC has some expendable ones. Their 
                brethren, large rust monsters and giant rust monsters, unfortunately can 
                not be pacified in this way.

Late game:

emperor lichs - Emperor lichs are trouble. An exception to the general rule in this 
                section, these annoying monsters are quite capable of killing a PC 
                quickly. They cast Death Ray, so resistance is essential. They see 
                invisible, are stat drainers and are summoners. A group of emperor 
                lichs, such as those found in greater undead vaults, is a challenge 
                even for level 50 PCs who have won the game. They are vulnerable to 
                high effectivity fire spells. Improved Fireball with effectivity +20 
                or more and willpower 48 or greater is a spellcaster PC's friend against 
                emperor lichs.

molochs - Molochs, and their larger brethren Greater Molochs, are a significant threat. 
          Their melee attack can be for 100 HP or significantly more in the case of 
          GMs. They fall into the annoying category because it is possible to run away 
          from them with any PC that has halfway decent speed. They typically have a 
          speed in the 60-70 range.

0.9.5 Weapon status - blessed, uncursed, cursed

The damage inflicted on an opponent that falls into the demon or undead category is 
dependent on the weapon's blessed vs uncursed vs cursed status.  The formulas are as follows:

For blessed weapons, inflicted damage = (normal damage * 1.5) - PV
For uncursed weapons, inflicted damage = (normal damage * 1.0) - PV
For cursed weapons, inflicted damage = (normal damage * 0.5) - PV

Cursed weapons also seem to be more prone to breakage.  Blessed weapons seem to be less 
prone to breakage.


0.10 Corruption


0.10.1 What is corruption?

Corruption is unavoidable in the Drakalor Chain for any PC who wants 
to make progress in the game.  It is a background process that happens 
as a result of the chaos gate at the bottom of the Caverns of Chaos 
being open.  Some locations remain free of corruption despite the gate 
being open, notably those near the surface of the Drakalor Chain.  In 
order to get anything done, however, the PC must descend into corrupting 
areas.  It is only a matter of time after that until the first corruption 
occurs.  After ninety days of game time elapses, corruption rate doubles.  
After the gate is closed, background corruption ceases, which is nice if 
the PC wants to play tourist for a while.  However, corruption can still 
be caused by artifacts that corrupt (section 0.10.2.3) as well as
corrupting hits from monsters (section 0.10.2.2).

Note that the possible corruptions occur in random order (not the order 
listed on this page) which is decided at the beginning of the game.  
However, if one or more corruptions are removed, the RNG is reseeded and 
the corruptions will reoccur in a new random order.

The following is a complete list of corruptions along with some comments 
about their effects and workarounds:

A - You are surrounded by an unholy aura (Ch: -10, DV: +6).

This causes monsters to become afraid of the PC at more or less random times.
In their frightened state, they will flee.  A very nasty side effect is that 
shopkeepers become homicidally enraged at PCs that enter shops with this 
corruption, fearing that their customers will be frightened away.  Note that 
invisible PCs do not suffer the effects of this corruption: monsters that 
cannot see invisible do not detect this corruption.  This works for 
shopkeepers until the "*foo* stares at your position with great intensity" 
message is generated.  After that, look out.

B - You rage (DV: -9, +6 melee damage)!

Mediocre increase to damage in exchange for losing nine points of DV.  Not 
a very good bargain, especially for low level characters, since this will 
make them easier to hit (and some monster hits cause further corruption).

C - Poison drips from your hands.

Some players hate this corruption more than any other.  PCs with this 
corruption poison any monsters they engage in melee (a nice effect), turn 
any potion they touch into poison (very bad) and curse any food they touch
(very bad).  It can result in starvation quickly.  The workaround is to wear 
thick gauntlets, which negate all of the above effects.  Alchemistic gloves 
also can negate these effects when picking up potions or food items, but it 
is not guaranteed.  However, alchemistic gloves *never* block the effects 
when drinking potions or eating food.

D - You have grown thorns (3d3 melee damage, Dx: -2, Ap: -3).

The extra melee damage occurs only when fighting unarmed.  Useful for Monks 
and Beastfighters, Necromancers using Shadow Touch.  Useless waste of 2 Dx 
points for all others.

E - Your close attunement to corrupted astral space allows teleportation.

Very, very nice if the PC has teleport control.  Very, very annoying if the 
PC doesn't have teleport control.

F - You have grown a bulging cranium (Le: +6, Wi: +4, Ap: -6, PV: -4, To: -3).

Nice learning and willpower increases.  PV goes down because the PC's 
inflated skull is thinner, making it easier to damage?  Not good for 
looks or toughness either.

G - You are a living mana battery.

Another nominee for the most hated corruption. All wands the PC touches are 
drained of their charges. This does not destroy them; their final charge can 
still be wrenched from them, but extremely annoying nonetheless. There is no 
workaround. Some side benefits: 1) every time the PC drains a wand, power 
points are added to the PC's power score: blessed wands give +2, uncursed +1 
and cursed 0 2) Spell costs are reduced to 80% of their normal cost - note 
that this is not cumulative with Darknight / Silvernight reductions, since 
costs cannot drop below 50% 3) Mana regeneration is increased.

H - You have grown horns (+3 melee damage, Ap: -4).

Melee damage in exchange for Appearance.

I - Your antennae explore the details of your environment (Ap: -4).

Kicks in quasirandomly to reveal a bit of the dungeon layout in the PC's 
immediate vicinty.  Loss of Appearance.

J - Your skin is covered by tough scales (PV: +8, Dx: -6, Ap: -4).

Nice PV increase, nasty Dexterity decrease. More loss of Appearance.

K - You have grown a total of 12 eyes (Ap: -6, Pe: +6).

Nice Perception increase, still more loss of Appearance.  Getting 
the idea?  By the endgame, PCs tend to get *ugly*.  ;-)

L - You exhale sulphur (Ch: -4).

This enables the PC to spit a corrosive acid much the same as a 
Drakeling's racial ability.

M - You look somewhat apish (St: +3, Le: -1, Wi: -1, Ch: -2, Ap: -3).

This corruption's effects reoccur periodically. Its effects are cumulative 
over time, so the PC keeps gaining Strength while losing Learning, Willpower, 
etc. The game notifies you when this is happening with the phrase "You 
suddenly remember your ancestors." Nice for fighter types, nasty for 
spellcasters.

N - Your corrupted tissue seems to heal much faster.

Another corruption causing cumulative effects. The PC heals faster, but the 
process leaves scars which reduce both Dexterity and Appearance by one point 
for each scar. Nasty over time.

O - Your feet have been transformed into hooves (+8 kicking damage, Dx: -6).

Nasty loss of Dexterity, especially since most PCs aren't kickers anyway.

P - You have become extremely thin and nimble (1/2 weight, DV: +6).

Very nice corruption, probably the best.  Six points of DV with no downside.
This is one of the corruptions needed to enter the quickling tree.

Q - Your muscles have stiffened slowing you down (base action cost: 1500 energy
    points; PV: +4, St: +2).

Another hated corruption.  Slows down all your movement by 1.5X.

R - You have become very light (1/10 weight, St: -6, Dx: +4, To: -6, Ap: -6,
    +20 speed).

Bad Strength and Toughness losses in exchange for speed and Dexterity.
And yes, more appearance loss.  This is the other corruption needed to 
enter the quickling tree.

Becoming corrupted beyond this point turns the PC into a chaos creature 
and the game ends at that point.  All those purple 'j's are probably former 
adventurers.

0.10.2 Gaining corruptions

The game keeps track of corruption with a numerical value which increments each time  
twenty turns pass in a corrupting zone. Note that there are 18 corruptions listed 
above.  For each 1000 "points" of corruption, the PC gains one corruption.  Simple 
arithmetic shows that 180 points equals 1% corruption and the PC gains a new 
corruption each time he passes a multiple of 1000/180 = 5.556%.  This is a strict
rule only up to 99% corruption.  The 99% corruption level begins at 99 * 180 = 17820 
corruption points, but the PC is given extra leeway at this point and does not 
transform into a chaos creature until the counter is over 19000 points.

0.10.2.1 Background corruption

As mentioned above, the PC must eventually enter areas where background corruption 
occurs.  The following tables show the corruption points gained in various areas:


Corruption free areas

Area                        Corruption points added per 20 turns

Small Cave                  0 before day 90
Uninteresting Dungeon       0
Dusty Dungeon lvls 1-2      0
Village Dungeon             0
Druid Dungeon               0
Puppy Cave                  0
Caverns of Chaos lvls 1-9   0
Infinite Dungeon lvls 1-9   0
Wilderness                  0
Gremlin Cave                0
Dwarven graveyard           0
Water dragon cave           0
Greater White Unicorn Glade 0
Terinyo                     0
Lawenilothehl               0
High Mountain Village       0
Old Barbarian's Glade       0
Mad Minstrel's clearing     0


Corrupting areas (while the gate is open)


Area                        Corruption points added per 20 turns

Small Cave (after 90th day) Probably PC exp lvl-dependent
Caverns of Chaos
D: 10-19                    1  (2)
DH1                         4  (8)
DH2                         10 (20)
D: 20-29                    1* (2**)
D: 30-39                    2  (4)
D: 40-44                    4  (8)
D: 45-47                    30 (40)
D: 48-50                    30 (40)
UL: 1-6                     10 (20)
MT                          10 (20)
DL: 1-5                     10 (20)
I: 10+                      probably similar to CoC
The Pyramid
PY: 1-3                     1  (2)
Tomb of the High Kings
UC:1-2                      1  (2)
UCBT                        1  (2)
Darkforge
NDC                         1  (2)
DFG                         1* (2**)
Assassin's Guild            1  (2)
Tower of Eternal Flames
The Rift
RL1 (Bottom)                4  (8)
RL2                         2  (4)
RL3                         1* (2**)
RL4                         1* (2**)
RL5                         1* (2**)
RL6                         1  (2)
RL7                         1  (2)
RL8                         1  (2)
RL9 (Top)                   1  (2)
LIB                         2  (4)
Minotaur Maze
AR                          1  (2)
ML1                         1* (2**)
ML2                         1* (2**)
ML3                         1* (2**)
ML4                         1* (2**)
ML5                         2  (4)
ML6                         2  (4)
MC                          2  (4)
Greater Black Unicorn Glade 4  (8)
The Quickling Tree          1* (2**)
Ancient Stone Circle        unknown
Scintillating Cave          unknown
SIL                         unknown

The figure in parentheses is after day 90. There is some inconsistency here, 
the figure after day 90 may be simply double in all cases.

* For each 60 turns, an additional point is added
** For each 60 turns, two additional points are added


Permanently corrupting areas

Area                      Corruption points added per 20 turns

Emperor Moloch's lair     Many
ChAoS                     Many

Note that a corrupting level can be made less so, or even completely 
noncorrupting, by reading scrolls of peace.  These reduce the danger 
level, and thus the corruption rate of the current level.  Bless the 
scrolls before reading them.  The number of scrolls required depends on 
the level.  If Dwarftown is generated on D: 10 or D: 11, for instance, 
reading two blessed scrolls of peace will probably stop corruption.  On 
the other hand, if it is necessary to stop corruption on a particular 
level of the blue dragon caves, approximately nine scrolls of peace are 
required.


0.10.2.2 Corruption traps

Corruption traps are as common as any other trap in the dungeons.
They cause a slight amount of corruption.  They are purple when
revealed.


0.10.2.3 Corrupting hits from monsters

Some monsters corrupt by hitting the PC in melee.  Common ones
include chaos brothers, chaos sisters and the grues found in
the elemental temples.  Appendix J contains a complete list.


0.10.2.4 Artifacts which corrupt

0.10.2.4.1 Moon Sickle

Moon Sickle is a unique artifact unlike any other in the game.  It does not
contain the essence of Chaos and Corruption and so does not corrupt merely
by carrying it.  Likewise, wielding it does not cause corruption.  However,
successfully hitting a monster with Moon Sickle adds 2d3 corruption points to
the PC's corruption counter.  Although it has no slaying powers, it is worth
considering as a weapon against very difficult monsters for those PCs who have
trained polearms, despite its corrupting nature.  It has excellent base damage
at 10d4+6 and polearms have decent to-hit and to-damage modifiers.  Remember,
however, that Moon Sickle is autocursing.


0.10.2.4.2 When carried

The following artifacts contain the essence of Chaos and
Corruption and will corrupt the PC merely by carrying them:

The Black Tome of Alsophocus
The Amulet of Raw Steel
The Shield of Raw Steel
The Boots of Great Speed
The Sceptre of Chaos
The Medal of Chaos
The Crown of Chaos

Additional research will be required to quantitate the effects.


0.10.2.4.3 When used

All of the Chaos Orbs fall into this category, however, there is a great deal
of difference in the amount of corruption caused by using the different Chaos
Orbs. Stephen White has determined the precise amount of corruption caused:

Corruption caused by using the Chaos Orbs

Chaos Orb  Corruption points added per use

Water       600
Fire        300
Air         500
Earth       300
Mana        4950

Note that if a PC is wearing the elemental gauntlets when the orbs are used, 
the above corruption points are halved.


0.10.2.5 Potions of raw chaos

Logically enough, if the PC drinks a potion of raw chaos it will cause
corruption.  They can also corrupt, however, if the PC tries to use
them to polymorph an item by dipping it in the potion.  There is a
chance the PC will spill the potion, which causes about four corruptions 
as well as 100 - 200 HP of damage.


0.10.2.6 Tracts of chaos

Tracts of chaos are not well understood. They probably grant corruption
at the expense of piety towards the PC's chaotic god, but this needs
testing.


0.10.2.7 From pools

Drinking from pools may result in the message "You feel corrupted!"
Self-explanatory.


0.10.2.8 From corpses

Some corpses will corrupt the PC if eaten.  Obvious ones include the
corpses of the Chaos Orb guardians.  Others include Keethrax, Keriax
and chaos animals.

The effects will be compiled here eventually.  Until then you can browse
Appendix J for corruptions resulting from eating monster corpses.


0.10.2.9 Riurry - the Greater Black Unicorn quest

Riurry will reward the PC with 1 - 2 corruptions for killing the Greater
White Unicorn Yrruir.


0.10.2.10 Being crowned a champion of chaos

Being crowned a champion of chaos will cause 2 - 3 immediate corruptions
in addition to making further corruption faster.

0.10.3 Removing corruptions

There will be a time when your PC wants to remove one or more corruptions.  Some
corruptionsare very troublesome and worth getting rid of immediately.  Later in 
the game, removing corruptions may be necessary simply to extend the life of the 
PC. Whatever the reason, a thorough knowledge of how to remove corruptions should 
be part of every experienced player's repertoire.  There are several ways of doing 
this as outlined below.  Corruption removal items are among the most precious in 
the game.  They should always be blessed unless the PC is trying to specifically 
remove only one corruption that is impossible to deal with (poison hands can be 
impossible to deal with without thick gauntlets) while preserving others (for 
instance one needed to enter the quickling tree).


0.10.3.1 Potions of cure corruption

Potions of cure corruption are exactly what the name implies - they remove corruption,
approximately 0.75 corruptions for each blessed potion of cure corruption the PC drinks.
A potion of cure corruption is also a quest object for Gaab'Baay.

Beware of cursed potions of cure corruption.  They cause corruption rather 
than curing it.

Magnus Malm has done some research on potions of cure corruption:

Potions of cure corruption

Status   Ten trials: corruption points added or removed     Min   Ave   Max

Cursed   +147 +139 +151 +147 +168 +138 +147 +122 +150 +162  +138  +147  +168
Uncursed -298 -298 -283 -258 -296 -291 -279 -275 -304 -279  -258  -286  -304
Blessed  -695 -733 -735 -795 -734 -812 -826 -841 -804 -716  -695  -769  -841


0.10.3.1.1 Obtaining potions of cure corruption from Guth'Alak

Potions of cure corruption can be obtained from the druid Guth'Alak in Terinyo.
He will reward a non-chaotic PC with a potion of cure corruption for delivering a
greater chaos creature's or highly corrupted creature's corpse to him.  Examples
are the corpses of Chaos Orb guardians, Keriax and Keethrax.  Black unicorn corpses
and greater black unicorn corpses also work.  If the PC is chaotic, it is a good
idea to sell a chaos creature's corpse to Munxip for safekeeping, then buy it back
at a later time when the PC is non-chaotic.  It can then be traded to Guth'Alak for
a potion of cure corruption.


0.10.3.2 Scrolls of chaos resistance

Blessed scrolls of chaos resistance remove about 1.5 corruptions per reading. There are
several places where scrolls of chaos resistance can be obtained: The only absolutely
guaranteed location is the hidden room in the High Mountain Village. This will always
contain one scroll of chaos resistance, although beware - it is always cursed.
Khelavaster will give six scrolls of chaos resistance to a PC that manages to save him.
The dwarven mystic in Dwarftown usually gives four blessed scrolls of chaos resistance
to neutral PCs.  Finally, the Mad Minstrel will reward a PC who brings him the Weird
Tome with five cursed scrolls of chaos resistance.

Beware of cursed scrolls of chaos resistance.  They cause corruption rather
than curing it.

Magnus Malm has done some research on scrolls of chaos resistance:


Scrolls of chaos resistance

Status   Ten trials: corruption points added or removed                Min    Ave    Max

Cursed   +293  +286  +301  +304  +324  +304  +311  +307  +284  +299    +284   +301   +324
Uncursed -595  -567  -539  -565  -618  -514  -562  -552  -500  -533    -500   -555   -618
Blessed  -1649 -1512 -1458 -1561 -1415 -1542 -1561 -1279 -1507 -1652   -1415  -1544  -1652

Note that these numbers are to a first approximation double those of potions of cure
corruption. Thus cursed SoCRs are twice as bad as cursed PoCCs, while blessed SoCRs are
twice as good as blessed PoCCs.  The implications should be obvious: never read any 
cursed corruption removal item, and bless SoCRs in any but a dire emergency.


0.10.3.3 Tracts of order

Reading a tract of order amounts to an appeal to the lawful god for corruption removal. 
This is not free and uses up piety. Do not try this with a PC who does not have a very 
good relationship with his lawful god.  In any case, the amount of corruption removed
appears to be small. Tracts of order are most useful to get rid of an annoying corruption 
as soon as it occurs, thus reseeding the RNG and hopefully avoiding it the next time a PC 
receives a corruption.


0.10.3.4 Yrruir - the Greater White Unicorn quest

Yrruir will remove all corruption *once* as a reward for the PC killing the 
Greater Black Unicorn - Riurry.  It is wise to wait to use this cleansing until 
it is absolutely necessary. If the PC is doing a normal ending, this should 
ideally be the last thing the PC does before leaving the Drakalor Chain to 
insure a corruption-free ending, which leads to better scores and a happier 
future history for the PC after the game is over.


0.11 Companions and slaves


0.11.1 Companions

Companions are allies who will help the PC, to a point. They can be obtained in several 
ways as outlined below. Companions are often referred to as pets if they are animals. 
One word of caution before attempting to create a powerful companion - they are fickle 
and will sometimes turn on the PC at the slightest provocation. Some types of companions 
have a distinct personality and bear careful watching. A high charisma score is very 
helpful when ordering companions about. Most companions (not undead like an Emperor Lich) 
can be healed using any of the normal techniques - casting Heal and throwing potions of 
healing, for example.

One problem that many players have with companions (or slaves) is that companions have a 
fixed speed. This means that as the game progresses and the PC gains speed via wearables, 
the Athletics skill, eating quickling corpses, etc., companions become slower and slower 
relative to the PC. This can become very annoying, with the PC forced to wait for 
companions to catch up. This problem makes many players reluctant to rely too heavily on 
companions.

Note also that companions cannot accompany PCs to D:50. Companions can be *created* on 
D:50, but they cannot cross D:49.


0.11.1.1 Scrolls of Familiar Summoning

These scrolls can be read to create a tame monster. The monster created is dependent on 
the danger level of the dungeon level. This means it is to the PC's advantage to read 
these in the most dangerous place possible. In the early midgame, the best place is 
probably the Dwarven Halls, since almost anything can show up there. Ancient karmic 
dragon, emperor lich and balor companions have been generated in the Dwarven Halls, for 
instance.


0.11.1.2 Figurines of wondrous power

These miniature statues are a relatively new feature in ADOM, implemented by TB in 
response to players' requests for pet shops. Figurines can also be found randomly in the 
dungeons. They generate a monster when 'u'sed; the type of monster corresponds to the 
name (i.e. a jackal figurine of wondrous power). If the figurine is blessed when 'u'sed, 
the monster produced is tame. As with scrolls of familiar summoning, it is best to use 
them in a dangerous place. The Small Cave is ideal, since newly generated monsters have 
roughly twice the experience level of the PC.


0.11.1.3 Taming monsters

This is a specialty of bards, but any PC with the Music skill can try to tame monsters by 
placing a musical instrument in the tool slot and 'u'sing it. Most PCs are not very 
successful at this until the Music skill level is in the 90s. The success rate is also 
dependent on the type of instrument used, with heavier instruments generally better than 
light ones.

Beggars can be made into companions by giving them gold and/or food.  The most recent 
report (December 28th, 2001) required about 8000 gold pieces and 10 cooked lizards.

Some monsters can be tamed by feeding them.  Cave lions and wild cats can be tamed by 
giving them rat or giant rat corpses.  This is very useful to remember if the PC wants 
the Ring of the Master Cat (see section 3.6).  Cave tigers can also be tamed, but they 
refuse to eat rat or giant rat corpses.  Instead, they like pieces of raw or fresh meat.  
Unfortunately, it takes more than five pieces of meat to completely tame them; this is 
out of reach for most PC's.  Wild cats (cave lions? cave tigers?) can also be tamed with 
fish, which can be obtained from water squares in the wilderness (see Section 0.4 re 
Survival).  Dogs can be tamed by giving them bones, which are readily available by killing 
skeletons.  This can be especially useful with blink dogs.  Tame a blink dog with bones, 
then get it involved in a fight.  The blink dog will summon more of his brethren, some of 
which will inevitably be killed.  A blink dog corpse will eventually be generated, which 
grants teleport control when eaten.  This is particularly useful for lawful PCs.  Since 
blink dogs are lawful, killing them will wreak havoc on a lawful PC's alignment.


0.11.1.4 Hawkslayer

The burly adventurer in the High Mountain Village will join a PC and act as a companion 
providing certain criteria are met: the PC must not be chaotic and the player (*not* the PC) 
must know a secret password ("Iceberg"). The only way to learn the password in ADOM itself 
is drinking from pools, and many players are reluctant to do so. Some players may remember 
Hawkslayer from the computer RPG "Bard's Tale III". The password is the same in that game.  
There is also an experience level requirement which is uncertain.  Level 25 PC's have 
successfully gotten Hawkslayer as a companion, so that stands as a maximum level for the 
requirement at the moment.

Hawkslayer is not super-buff as companions go, but he is not bad. 

On arriving at the HMV with a level 15 PC and using a blessed stethoscope on him, 
Hawkslayer was found to be:

You examine Hawkslayer, the burly adventurer. Diagnosis: Level: 1, DV: 24, PV: 15, 
Hits: 355, Attacks: 1, Damage: 14-50. Speed: 120.

A report from the Russian ADOM newsgroup on September 14th, 2000 described a PC who was 
very careful with Hawkslayer to start, training him in the upper levels of the CoC, 
proceeding to the Big Room then deeper into the CoC until he was able to take on molochs 
and balors. Using a blessed stethoscope on him at that point gave the following:

You examine Hawkslayer, the burly adventurer. Diagnosis: Level: 110, DV: 96, PV: 36, 
Hits: 805, Attacks: 11, Damage: 50-86. Speed:120.

Quite impressive.

Hawkslayer uses eternium arrows which can be retrieved for the PC's own use.

It is possible to equip Hawkslayer with items in ADOM 1.0.0.  If the PC drops certain 
equipment to the ground next to him hewill pick up the items and equip them.

Unfortunately he will not wear body armor, but will equip boots, cloaks, gauntlets and 
shields.  Be very careful, however.  He will not equip these items after he is the PC's 
companion.  The items must simply be dropped next to him *before* giving him the secret 
password.  This behavior will probably change in future versions of ADOM.


0.11.2 Slaves

Slaves are the undead created to serve a necromancer PC. They share some characteristics 
with companions. They will fight against a necromancer PC's opponents up to the point 
where injuries cause them to panic and become afraid of further combat. As with 
companions, a high Charisma score enables the necromancer to better control his slaves. 
Note that traditional methods of healing damage undead rather than healing them. The 
Bless spell also damages undead. Undead in skeletal form (skeletons and skeletal 
warriors) can be healed by giving them bones. Others must simply heal at their natural 
rate, which is often frustratingly slow.

If a necromancer manages to survive to a high enough level to find quickling corpses, 
especially higher-level quickling corpses, most of the problems with undead vanish. 
Quicklings are considered humanoid in ADOM and so their corpses can be animated with 
necromancy. They are extremely fast (this also means the problem with slow companions 
vanishes, see section 0.11.1) and regenerate wounds at a phenomenal rate. One particular 
quickling king skeletal warrior on record killed Nuurag-Vaarn, the Chaos Archmage, before 
the PC knew it had happened.

Note that slaves are not subject to the experience level 50 limit as PCs are. It is quite 
possible for slaves to reach experience level 100 and higher. Needless to say, they 
become formidable at those levels.

One trick necromancers can use to create out of depth slaves is to exploit the properties 
of the small cave (check section 1.2.3 for a general explanation of how the small cave 
works). In this scenario, a necromancer PC avoids entering the small cave at the 
beginning of the game, instead gaining early experience in the infinite dungeon or 
elsewhere. As the game progresses, a source of invisibility will eventually be found. It 
is rare for monsters that see invisible to be generated in the small cave. At the same 
time, many are humanoid and their corpses are usable for necromancy. If an experience 
level 20 necromancer enters the small cave while invisible, he can reasonably expect to 
leave or descend into the unremarkable dungeon with a couple of level 35 - 40 slaves. 
Very useful at that point in the game.

Below is a chart that shows the choices a level 50 necromancer has for creating undead. 
More detail will be added to this, indicating exactly what experience level is required 
for each undead type. Note that the mana cost to create some undead will be higher for 
lower level PCs.


  Undead being                                             Mana Cost

  [A]  Skeleton............................................... 1
  [B]  Zombie................................................. 1
  [C]  Ghul................................................... 1
  [D]  Shadow................................................. 1
  [E]  Corpse fiend........................................... 1
  [F]  Wight.................................................. 1
  [G]  Wraith................................................. 1
  [H]  Mummy.................................................. 1
  [I]  Skeletal warrior....................................... 1
  [J]  Ghost.................................................. 1
  [K]  Spectre................................................ 2
  [L]  Vampire................................................ 4
  [M]  Shadow lord............................................ 5
  [N]  Lich................................................... 8


0.12 Intrinsics


0.12.1 Resistance

There are various resistances available. These are:

Damage types: fire, cold, acid, shock
Special attacks: paralysis, petrification, poison, confusion, death rays, sleep, stun

Remember that resistance does NOT equal immunity in ADOM, i.e. being hit by a death ray 
while resistant will not kill you instantly, but will still deal a significant amount 
of damage.

Some of the resistances can be gained by eating an appropriate monster corpse:

Intrinsic fire resistance can be gained by eating the corpse of fire-related creatures. 
The game generates messages related to this:

Fire beetle (10% chance of gaining fire resistance):

You suddenly feel very hot! (whether or not resistance has actually been granted)

Fire lizard : (50% chance of gaining fire resistance):

You suddenly shiver. (fire resistance granted)
This stuff cools you down! (fire resistance not granted)

Larger fire creatures, e.g. fire drakes, red dragons, etc. seem to grant fire resistance 
every time.

There are further considerations about fire resistance in the Tower of Eternal Flames. 
See section 2.19 for more explanation.

Cold resistance can be gained by eating a white dragon corpse.

Acid resistance can be gained by eating ankheg, ant or black dragon corpses.

Shock resistance can be gained by eating lightning lizard or blue dragon corpses.

Poison resistance can be gained by eating giant centipede, snake or spider corpses. 
Be aware that this both poisons the PC and grants resistance, so the PC will have 
to endure a brief period of poisoning.

An interesting test conducted by Petri Sihvola regarding petrification by a gorgon's 
breath:

> I did some testing and there's an approximate 50% chance of dying 
> to a gorgon breath without resistance. However, if DV is high enough 
> the chance is drastically reduced. This one shows my DV and how many 
> times I died:

> DV:23  10/20
> DV:44   8/20
> DV:53   1/20
> DV:69   0/20

> This was also without the alertness skill.


0.12.2 Immunity

Immunity to the four basic damage types is possible: fire, cold, acid and shock. 
Immunity means that the PC will take no damage from the corresponding elemental 
attack. However, creatures which deal elemental damage can still harm the PC, 
due to their ability to deal physical damage. The PC is only immune to damage from 
the elemental attack.

Obtaining immunities: 

Crowning: 

    grants an immunity to one of fire, cold, acid or shock

Wearables: 

    dragon scale mail grants immunity to the corresponding element: 
        red - fire 
        white - cold 
        blue - shock 
        black - acid
    the Ancient Mummy Wrapping grants immunity to cold 
    the girdle "Celestrix" grants immunity to shock (if it still exists) 
    the Crown of Science grants immunity to fire 
    the shield of raw steel grants immunity to fire and cold 
    the armor "Nature's Companion" grants immunity to fire and shock 
    the Ring of Immunity grants all four immunities

Wielded weapons: 

    the Scorched Spear grants immunity to cold 
    the rune-covered trident grants immunity to cold 
    the hammer of the gods grants immunity to shock 
    the mighty morning star "Grod" grants immunity to fire 
    the Staff of the Wanderer grants immunity to shock 
    the Trident of the Red Rooster grants all four immunities

Corpses: 

    Eating a giant slug corpse grants immunity to acid
    Eating a *blessed* lightning lizard corpse has a 12.5% 
           chance of granting shock immunity
    Eating Srraxxarrakex's corpse grants immunity to shock

Class powers:

    Assassins receive immunity to poison at level 40
    Druids receive shock immunity at level 40
    Weaponsmiths receive fire immunity at level 32


0.12.3 Dooming and Cursing

Dooming or Cursing, as might be expected from the names, is generally to be avoided. 
They result from committing acts that are very contrary to the PCs alignment. For 
example, robbing shops with a lawful PC may cause both cursing and dooming. Robbing a 
shop with a neutral PC may cause only cursing. Robbing a shop with a neutral PC and 
killing the shopkeeper on the way out will quite likely cause both dooming and cursing. 
They are also quite commonly obtained by drinking from pools. Cursing makes the game 
nudge all the die-rolls against the PC, generate more monsters which hit harder while 
the PC's hits become weaker. Dooming is a more severe form of this. Dooming also 
increases food consumption, makes traps more difficult to avoid and makes it much more 
difficult to pray for divine help.

Nevertheless, there are ways to exploit these intrinsics. These techniques are not for 
the beginner, of course. Since monsters become tougher, they are worth more experience 
and carry better items. Vaults become more common. If the PC wants to achieve Grand 
Mastery in a weapon class, becoming Cursed and/or Doomed in the wilderness is the only 
way to do it in a reasonable time frame.

Dooming and cursing can be removed by sacrificing at a coaligned altar. It may take 
considerable sacrificing to remove the Cursed/Doomed intrinsics, since they are only 
removed at the "very close" level of piety.  Praying while the PC is already at very 
close status also may remove dooming and/or cursing, although these intrinsics make 
it more difficult to appeal for divine assistance, as noted above. Removing Dooming 
(only) results in the message "You feel a terrible gloom being lifted from you." 
Removing Cursing (only) results in the message "You feel relieved." Removing both 
Cursing and Dooming simultaneously results in only the "You feel a terrible gloom 
being lifted from you." message.

Another trick for exploiting the Doomed state is as follows: If a PC finds an altar 
early in the game, ideally before the Si level so that zero or very few artifacts have 
been generated, the PC should purchase or acquire plenty of food (cooked lizards and/or 
stomafillia herbs), become Doomed by eating a Dooming corpse (daemons and quasits spring 
to mind) or wearing a ring of Doom, and then exploit the heavy monster generation by 
sacrificing the monsters on the altar. This can quickly lead to very close or even 
extremely close status. After the Dooming is removed, by removing a cursed ring of doom 
or through reaching very close status, the PC can be crowned or precrowned.

Dooming also has an effect in dark rooms: if a Doomed PC wanders into a dark room, there 
is a 1 in 1000 chance for an instakill every turn "You are likely to be eaten by a grue." 
(this only applies to Doomed characters).

Deliberately playing in a Cursed or Doomed state is dangerous and should be reserved for 
those players who know exactly why they are doing it.


0.12.4 Lucky and Fate Smiles

The Lucky and Fate Smiles intrinsics are the good counterparts to the Cursing and Dooming 
intrinsics, respectively. They cause the game to nudge die-rolls in the PC's favor. The 
effect is not as dramatic as the Dooming and Cursing intrinsics. It should be noted that 
all four intrinsics may be present simultaneously. The negative ones are considerably 
stronger.

The Lucky and Fate Smiles intrinsics are naturally gained by PCs as they sacrifice on 
coaligned altars; the messages are:

"You feel an inner strength lifting your spirits!" - The Lucky intrinsic
"You feel very close to -deity-." - The Fate Smiles intrinsic


0.12.5 Teleportitis and teleport control

Teleportitis is a "disease" that causes your PC to teleport around randomly. It is 
obtainable from pools ("You feel jumpy"), corruption ("your close attunement to corrupted 
astral space allows teleportation"), from eating the right corpse (pixie) and items (helm 
of teleportation, cloak of Oman). It can be useful for escaping tight spots such as being 
surrounded by monsters (though it never seems to kick in when needed ;), for shoplifting 
and for reaching areas that are usually inaccessible.

Teleport control allows you to choose the destination when teleporting your PC. It works 
whether the cause of the teleportation is teleportitis or deliberate, such as zapping a 
wand of teleportation or casting the Teleport spell at the PC's current location. 
Mindcrafters always get teleport control at experience level one, others have to rely on 
eating the right corpse (blink dog), drinking from pools ("you feel like jumping around") 
or wearing items (amulet/ring of teleport control).


0.12.6 Special birth messages

The night you were born....

...the local undead were seen packing up and moving away.

It means that your character will gain (or is born with?) the "natural enemy of undead" 
intrinsic. This makes undead flee from you periodically.

...your long lost brother showed up.

Greater chance of special locations generated in dungeons (hives, shops, pools, etc.)

...a two headed calf was born.

This one means that you get better dice rolls in your level-up skill increases. Probably 
double.

...a falling star killed the village elder.

Not known for certain: Probably a bonus to proficiency with (a) missile weapon(s), 
possibly an attribute bonus.


0.12.7 Water breathing

It is possible to gain the water breathing intrinsic by eating Blup's or Shyssiryxxius' 
corpse. The message "For some seconds a strange liquid seems to fill your lungs." is 
generated.

Elementalists receive water breathing as an intrinsic class power at experience level 25. 
Certain items and wielded weapons grant the intrinsic. The most common items are probably 
the helm of water breathing and amulet of water breathing.

Other items which grant this ability include:

rings of the fish - AUTOCURSING; 1 blessed or 2 of any status stop drowning damage, 
                    although water breathing is not listed as an intrinsic at the time.
the rune-covered trident - when wielded
the Trident of the Red Rooster - when wielded
the Medal of Chaos - when worn


0.13 Dungeon features

0.13.1 Level Messages, Special Messages

See also section 0.2.3 Altars for messages generated when sacrificing.

Messages which indicate the presence of monsters or monster vaults:

"You feel excited." - a vault on the level
"You feel truly excited." - a greater vault
"You sense a certain tension." - a room full of monsters
"You sense the death of an innocent being." - the cute puppy has just been killed
"You feel a surge of power." - an artifact, guarded by a named monster
"You hear a distant wind." - a vortex
"You hear a distant "Hurumph!"" - Dorn Beast
"*THUMB*" - titan or greater moloch
"You hear a horrible unearthly wail in the distance!" - Banshee
"You see a small hole in the ground." - a hive
"Something is moving in the hole beneath your feet." - a hive creature is trying to 
                                                       emerge while the PC is standing 
                                                       on the hive
"You nearly fall into a small hole in the ground." - a hive in the dark
"You see a crumpled hole in the ground." - an empty hive
"The floor is very rough here." - an empty hive in the dark
"You hear clicking sounds." - ants
"You hear buzzing sounds." - bees
"You hear an evil hissing and something large crawling about the ground." - ant queen
"You hear a vile buzzing sound!" - queen bee
"The whole dungeon level seems to be shaking." - This, in general, indicates that a hive 
creature tried to emerge from a hive and was not successful. It will be followed by 
messages that indicate the reason, for instance "The center of the earthquake seems to 
be directly beneath your feet!" which means the PC is standing on the hive. There are 
other messages that need to be compiled regarding other monsters standing on the hive, 
etc.
"You hear a slurping sound." - a spider spun a web
"You hear a ripping sound." - a web was torn apart
"You hear a burping/popping sound." - a breeder just bred
"You hear a grinding sound." - something just dug through stone
"You sense imminent danger..." - chance of out-of-depth danger generation
"... but the feeling passes." - but it didn't happen
"You sense a rupture in the spiritual aura of this place." - a (greater) moloch 
                                                             smashed an altar
"Someone shouts: "*Yippiyaiyay!*"" - Tywat Pare has found a bandit

Messages which indicate the presence of a special dungeon feature:

"You hear the wind howling." - a forge
"A lot of stuff seems to be standing around here." - the PC is standing at a forge's 
                                                     location in the dark
"You sense a pious aura." - an altar
"You stumble against some stone block." - the PC is standing on an altar in the dark
"You hear someone counting money." - shop
"You hear arcane mumbling." - shop
"You hear someone cursing shoplifters." - shop
"You hear the chime of a tiny bell." - shop
"You feel observed." - shop - an invisible PC has been detected by a shopkeeper who is 
                              out of LOS
"You hear splashing sounds." - a pool (note similarity to acid trap below)
"Your feet suddenly feel wet." - a pool in the dark or while blind
"You hear the sound of rushing water!" - a river (note similarity to water trap below)
"You hear the sound of falling coins." - royal vault
"You hear the steps of the royal guard." - royal vault
"Something shifts beneath your feet!" - The PC entered the top level of the Pyramid while 
                                        blind or while the stairway is covered in darkness

Messages which indicate the presence of traps:

"You hear a splashing sound." - an acid trap was triggered
"You hear the sound of rushing water." - a water trap was triggered
"You hear a strange "ZAP!"" - a light trap (also possibly a flash/stun door trap) was 
                              triggered
"You hear a pained *foo sound* in the distance." - a weapon trap was triggered
"You suddenly sense taint in your vicinity." - a corruption trap was triggered
"You sense a soul in agony." - a corruption trap was triggered
"You hear a thudding sound." - a stone block just fell
"You hear the sound of toppling stones." - a stone block trap was triggered
"You hear a thundering explosion." - a fireball trap was triggered
"The -foo- seems to move very carefully." - a monster (or companion) encountered a trap
"You shudder." - a trap-filled room is somewhere on the level

Messages which indicate a unique level:

"You feel watched. You shiver. You shiver really bad!" - The Gremlin Cave
"This air of this level is filled with a strange smell." - the si level
"You hear someone chuckling evilly." - the underground level of the Dwarven Graveyard
"You smell the reek of sulphur, steel and oil." - Darkforge
"The air suddenly is filled with the stench of death. The stone is colored in strange 
 gray shades and everything seems to be decaying, rotting and dying slowly." - The CoC 
 graveyard
"This dungeon is very dusty." - The second level of the Assassin's guild
"Water drips constantly from the ceiling..." - the water temple level
"This whole level seems to be filled with emotions of terror, sorrow, pain and death..." 
 - the Banshee's level
"Stormy winds howl through these tunnels." - the air temple level
"This level is intensely hot! The rocks are glowing..." - the fire temple level
"You sense an intense tension." - the battle bunny level
"This level seems somehow removed from the rest of the world." - The Cat Lord level
"The walls seem to be closing in..." - the earth temple level
"This part of infinity seems to be special in a very eerie way. You wonder whether you 
 would be able to find it ever again..." - The SIL
"The walls and floor of this level are filled with the marks of huge reptiles... hundreds 
 of such marks." - the final level of the blue dragon caves
"You feel touched by the forces of chaos..." - the lair of the Emperor Moloch
"Some strange energy fills the air causing your skin to itch." - the mana temple level
"This level is covered with a very slippery layer of ice." - D: 49
"This level is very strange... the walls are hard to see, everything
 seems to blur and you feel slightly dizzy." - D: 50

Special messages:

"Oh my, I'm so lonely and need some company." - random, any NPC can say this, small lawful 
 boost if the PC agrees to spend time with the NPC
"You feel a great wave of relief rushing through these tunnels." - Jharod has healed 
 Yrrigs while both are out of line of sight
"Jharod, the healer, suddenly seems to touch someone in a soothing way. You feel a 
 great wave of relief rushing towards you." - Jharod, in LOS, has healed Yrrigs, out of 
 LOS
"You suddenly feel ancient magical energies manifest in your vicinity." - the PC has just 
 achieved experience level 13; the papyrus scroll has been generated, which is an 
 invitation to enter the Pyramid (see section 2.9).  Alternatively:
"You suddenly feel ancient magical energies manifest at your feet." - same as above, but 
 the papyrus scroll was generated on the dungeon square where the PC is standing
"Your equipment suddenly seems to weigh less." - an item has disappeared from the PC's 
 pack, most likely a food item susceptible to rotting - this includes corpses, apples 
 and pieces of raw meat
"Your -foo- starts to rot!" - a food item in the PC's pack has started to rot (which 
 means it has changed from uncursed to cursed status)
"Your -foo- rots away!" - a (cursed) food item in the PC's pack has rotted away; the 
 difference between this message and "Your equipment suddenly seems to weigh less." may 
 be Perception dependent or may involve other factors
"You feel a change of mind in a being close to you" - A pet has become hostile
"You feel like scum." OR "You feel like a traitor." - The PC sacrificed a pet
"Your mood darkens." - PC has lost blessed status
"For a moment you feel dizzy." - A monster tried to teleport to the PC's location
"You hear a thudding sound." - A thrown rock landed without being destroyed OR a wounded 
 monster died after running out of the PC's line of sight
"You feel responsible." - the PC killed a ratling guardian
"You feel a horrible loss." - the cute dog transformed into a writhing mass of primal chaos
"You smash the stones to pieces. Some stuff buried in the rock in uncovered!" - the PC dug 
 through stone, uncovering an item dropped by a monster that was killed while in the wall
"The altar is smashed by the greater moloch! An energy bolt strikes down on the greater moloch!
 The greater moloch shruggs it off and laughs with malicious glee!" - pretty self-explanatory
"*SORRY, MISSED*" - the above happens, but the PC is doomed; the god strikes at the PC by mistake
"You hit something and notice a thudding sound." - the PC killed an invisible monster with a missile
"Drops of blood appear on the ground." - an invisible monster is bleeding


0.13.2 Traps

Traps are exactly what the name implies. They are represented by carets ^ in the dungeon 
maps once they are discovered. There are several varieties which do various nasty things 
to the PC or his worn or carried inventory:


Acid trap           green caret        damages or destroys non-artifact worn equipment
Alarm trap          orange caret       warns every monster on the level of the PC's 
                                       presence and causes them to become hostile
Arrow trap          white caret        shoots an arrow at the PC; can be exploited to 
                                       gain arrows
Ceiling trap        dark blue caret    drops a portion of the ceiling on the PC; 
                                       only found in the mana temple
Corruption trap     purple caret       corrupts the PC; a relatively small effect
Explosion trap      red caret          generates a fireball at the location of the trap
Light trap          yellow caret       blinds the PC
Pit trap            brown caret        PC falls into a hole; can be used to train 
                    OR cyan caret      Climbing; two types, one contains vipers; appear 
                                       as cyan caret if detected with a wand of trap 
                                       detection, brown caret if detected with the Detect 
                                       Traps skill (this may well be a bug)
Spear trap          brown caret        shoots a spear at the PC; can be exploited as a 
                                       source of metal
Stone block trap    gray caret         drops a stone block on the PC; can kill low level 
                                       PCs
Teleportation trap  light green caret  teleports the PC; sometimes handy for on-demand 
                                       teleportation
Water trap          blue caret         causes a gush of water; can destroy scrolls if the 
                                       PC does not have a waterproof blanket to protect 
                                       the backpack; rusts vulnerable armor and weapons

Traps can be deliberately set off by standing on the trap and pressing ctrl-T.

It should be noted that traps affect monsters as well as the PC: light traps will blind 
monsters, corruption traps will corrupt monsters, acid traps will damage monsters, etc.
An interesting use for an alarm trap is to lure a monster across it.  Other monsters 
will become hostile towards the monster which triggered the trap and attack it.  This 
can be very handy for disposing of cats (see section 0.9.2).

Traps can be discovered with the Detect Traps skill. PCs with this skill automatically 
apply it when the 's'earch command is used. In ordinary dungeons it is not worth using 
this technique, but in heavily trapped areas (the underground level of the Dwarven 
Graveyard, the Pyramid, certain elemental temples) it is definitely prudent to use this 
skill multiple times during every turn where the PC suspects a trap is present.

Traps are much easier to avoid once they are discovered, probably by a factor of 100 or 
more. This is why the Detect Traps skill is so useful. Every PC should attempt to gain 
this skill. Wands of trap detection can be used for this, but they run out of charges. 
They can be recharged of course, but the skill never runs out and is unaffected by the 
mana battery corruption.

Traps occur in a known pattern. The order, left to right or top to bottom, is:

Light trap
Corruption trap
Stone block trap
Alarm
Arrow trap
Acid trap
Pit - this pit is distinct from the other in that it contains vipers
Spear trap
Teleportation trap
Water trap
Fireball trap
Pit - simple pit, no vipers

There are several places on fixed-layout levels where trap types and locations are shown 
in these documents. Note that trap *types*, in particular, are dependent upon the dungeon 
level where the fixed-layout level in question is generated. Examples include Dwarftown 
and (most of) the elemental temples. There is generally a warning in those sections 
concerning variations caused by differing dungeon level. There is also variability 
introduced if the player chooses to play with nonstandard resolution. There is no warning 
about this factor. Nevertheless, the above pattern applies; identifying a single trap 
allows the player to predict the type of trap generated elsewhere on the level.

Finally, bear in mind that PCs with high Alertness, Perception and Dexterity stats will 
avoid undiscovered traps much more successfully than those without these abilities.

Note that it is not possible to use the 'w5' (walk in place) command while standing on 
a trap.


0.13.3 Doors

There are doors on many of the dungeon room entrances. The majority of doors are not a 
problem. However, they can be locked or locked and trapped.


0.13.3.1 Locked doors

Locked doors can be opened using several methods. The most obvious is with a key that 
fits the lock. Keys are randomly found in the dungeons. Skriek, the ratling in 
Lawenilothehl, also sells keys. Blessed keys will generally open a locked door without 
setting off a trap if one is present. A message is generated: "You notice a clicking 
sound." meaning a trap was bypassed. Cursed keys will often break when used, setting off 
a trap in the process, if one is present. Doors can be kicked down; this will set off a 
trap every time if one is present.  An unsuccessful attempt to kick down a non-trapped 
door yields the message "You kick the door but it does not budge." An unsuccessful attempt 
to kick down a trapped door yields the message "You kick the door but it does not budge at 
all."  In this case the PC was extremely lucky, since kicking a trapped door almost 
invariably sets off the trap. Huge rocks or anvils can be thrown at doors to smash them. 
Doors can be tunneled around with a pickaxe. The safest way to open a door is with the 
Knock spell or a wand of knocking. A magical breeze blows the door open and traps are 
completely bypassed.

As with traps, door locks occur in a known pattern. The order, left to right or top to 
bottom, is:

Tiny lock
Square lock
Round lock
Triangular lock
Hexagonal lock
Small lock


0.13.3.2 Door traps

There are different types of door traps:


Collapsing door drops door directly in front of doorway, damages the PC and worn equipment
Explosive rune  arguably the worst door trap, destroys a variety of worn items and 
                backpack items and damages the PC; a new effect in ADOM 1.1.x+ is possible 
                deafening of the PC
Fireball trap   similar to the explosion trap, generates a fireball, can injure 
                companions, making them become hostile
Flash           blinds the PC temporarily, also can stun the PC - might be two different 
                types of traps
Trick door      similar to the stone block trap, drops stones directly in front of the 
                door, can kill low level PCs

Players should get into the habit of never standing directly in front of a door when 
opening it whenever possible. This will completely eliminate deaths from trick door traps 
and damage from collapsing doors. It also lessens the damage from an explosive rune: "You 
partially evade the explosion." As with ordinary traps, PCs with high Dexterity are more 
successful at evading door traps: "Suddenly a huge rock drops directly in front of the 
door! You barely evade it by jumping backwards!"

If the PC has the Detect Traps skill, it is worth 'a'pplying it a few times in the 
direction of closed doors.


0.13.3.3 Secret doors

Some doors are hidden and must be 's'earched for.  A ring of searching will do this 
automatically.  Alternatively, secret doors may be discovered by 'k'icking them.  Kicking a 
normal dungeon wall results in the message "You hurt your foor kicking the wall!".  Kicking a 
concealed secret door results in the message "You really hurt your foot kicking the wall!"


0.13.4 Dark rooms

Dark rooms, and dark areas in general, are just that - dark. They are problematic since 
approaching enemies can't be seen. It is also possible to inadvertantly kill a creature 
in a dark room. The darkness can be permanently dispelled with the Light spell or a wand 
of light. A torch or an amulet of light provides a temporary light source. If a doomed 
PC enters a dark room, there is a 1 in 1000 chance of being instakilled by a grue each 
turn.


0.13.5 Tension rooms, threatening rooms

Tension rooms are relatively small rooms filled with monsters. They always have doors 
that cause the walls around them to crumble. This allows the monsters within to swarm 
the PC. They can be filled with monsters of one type, two separate types or a variety 
of different monsters. Mixed tension rooms in particular can contain out-of-depth 
monsters. Since the level message "You sense a certain tension." is always associated 
with these rooms, the PC is forewarned. It is prudent to find out what is in the tension 
room with a wand of monster detection, especially at deeper dungeon levels. It is quite 
possible to be faced with a ghost king and ancient karmic dragon simultaneously from 
such a room.

A new variant of tension rooms has appeared in ADOM 1.0.0+.  The level message "You feel 
threatened." is generated on levels containing these rooms.  These rooms are similar to 
tension rooms, but are always filled with a single type of monster. In addition, they do 
not have the crumbling walls feature of tension rooms.


0.13.6 Herbs

Herb bushes are always found in the Big Room (level 6 of the Caverns of Chaos) and 
randomly elsewhere in the dungeons. They grow according to Conway's Life rules. They are 
as follows:

If the bush has 0 or 1 neighboring bush, it will die in the next generation
If the bush has 2 or 3 neighboring bushes, it will survive through the next generation
If the bush has 4 neighboring bushes, it will die in the next generation
If an empty dungeon square has 3 neighboring bushes, a new bush will grow during the next 
generation

Births and deaths are simultaneous

ADOM adds to this: if a bush has two neighbors, it will remain the same during the next 
generation. If a bush has three neighbors, it will generate more blossoms during the next 
generation. These additions are important, since there are many stable patterns, but very 
few that will continue to blossom over time. For instance the following patterns are 
stable:


                                       *     *     
                                      * *   * *     
                                      * *    *    
                                       *           

but are quite useless as far as ADOM is concerned. Since none of the bushes has three 
neighbors, once they reach a withered state they will never recover. The best pattern to 
create for farming herbs in ADOM is a 2 x 2 square of herbs. This will remain alive 
indefinitely and generate more herb blossoms every generation. It is also worth preserving 
a 1 x 3 pattern. This is a pattern that oscillates between horizontal and vertical. Since 
two of the herb bushes are new each generation and therefore unpicked, they will 
constantly be renewed. The danger with this pattern is overharvesting. If one bush dies, 
they all die. The square 2 x 2 pattern does not have this liability. If one (and only one) 
bush dies, it will be filled in the next generation.

Herbs apparently require light to survive. A message "It's dark here! Some herb bushes 
full of blossoms are growing here. The vegetation beneath your feet shrivels and suddenly 
is gone." has been observed.

Herbs have the following properties:


Name            Method of use   Cursed effect      Uncursed effect        Blessed effect

stomafillia          eat        satiates less      satiates               bloats

stomacemptia         eat        near starvation    makes hungry!          makes almost hungry
 
curaria mancox       eat        smaller effect     fights sickness        cures sickness
                                             
devil's rose         eat        severe sickness    sickness               mild sickness

alraunia antidote    eat        smaller effect     dilutes poisoning      cures most poisoning

demon daisies        eat        severely poisons   poisons                mildly poisons

pepper petal         eat        smaller effect     heals a little         heals more (~27 points)

burb root            eat        more damage        burns stomach damage   less damage
                             
morgia root          eat        exercises Wi & To  exercises Wi & To      really exercises Wi & To

spenseweed           use        smaller effect     heals a little         heals more (~30 points)

moss of mareilon     use        abuses Dex         exercises Dex          really exercises Dex

See section 0.6.1.3 for more on training stats with herbs.

Herbs can be generated on any dungeon level by 'U'sing a potion of holy water on a 
dungeon square, even for PCs without the Gardening skill.  The success rate is about 
33%.  Note that while any dungeon level will work, only those levels which already 
had herbs will support herb growth.  In other words, herbs will not undergo the normal 
growth cycle unless the dungeon level had indigenous herbs.  Consequently, the PC should 
avoid creating herbs in this manner unless the dungeon level already has herbs, unless 
it is a matter of life or death.  Be sure to take advantage of the information below 
about creating especially desirable herbs.

Reproduced here is a 

-----short treatise on herbs by the newsgroup poster known as Loves A Dustbin-----:

The patterns governing herb growth are well documented elsewhere, but it is also quite 
easy to tell what kind of herb a given bush will produce. How? It's determined by the 
line on the screen at which the bush appears. Using the big room as a guide, the first 
screen line at which a floor or dungeon feature can appear is line 5, whose herb bushes 
always produce morgia roots. The line below that is home to moss of mareilon, and below 
that is the mighty spenseweed. Curaria mancox/devil's roses are next, followed by 
alraunia antidote/demon daisy, followed by stomafillia/stomacemptia, followed by pepper 
petal/burb root. The line after pepper petal is morgia root again, and the pattern 
repeats. Presented more visually (and best viewed in a monospaced font):

(line no.
  mod 7)  type of herb found at that line
---------+--------------------------------
    5    | morgia root
    6    | moss of mareilon
    0    | spenseweed
    1    | curaria mancox/devil's rose
    2    | alraunia antidote/demon daisy
    3    | stomafillia/stomacemptia
    4    | pepper petal/burb root

If you don't know what "line number mod 7" means in the above chart, feel free to ignore 
it. Just remember that the pattern starts with morgia root for the topmost line at which 
herb bushes usually appear (barring any digging) and repeat every seven lines. BTW, if 
you are like me in never remembering which beneficial herbs are paired with demon daisies 
and devil's roses, remember the "a" in "daisy" matches the "a"'s in "alraunia" and the 
"o" in "rose" matches the "o" in "mancox." Kinda cheesy, but it works.

On a standard 80x25 character screen, there are fifteen lines on which floors and dungeon 
features may appear, yielding two complete repetitions of the pattern with a bonus line 
of morgia root at the bottom. Lines 4, 20, and 21 may be burrowed to yield floors there 
too, and herb bushes can grow into these lines once dug out if their growth patterns 
permit it. If you play on a larger screen, use the "l"ook command to count down the line 
number of a given herb bush, keeping in mind that the "look" cursor's topmost limit is 
line 3, which would be stomafillia according to the pattern.

It is sometimes possible to move herb bushes to the lines you want in order to get a 
particularly desirable herb. You need four herb bushes in a "T" shape, like this (again, 
view it in a monospaced font):

...
"""
.".

When it's time for new bushes to grow, you'll get this pattern. . .

.".
"""
"""

. . . pick the bottom row clean. . .

.".
"""
...

. . . and wait for another generation to pass. . .

"""
"""
.".

Then harvest the bottom bush of each column to oblivion.

"""
.".
...

Voila! The T has moved up a row. You can also use an inverted T to move downward, or T's 
laid on their sides to move left or right. Once your T is in the position you want, just 
pluck off one end of the crossbar to get the ever-lovin' herb square. The process isn't 
risk-free, however. For one thing, generations of herb growth are not always predictable, 
and you may find two generations spawning in quick succession without giving you enough 
time in between to overharvest the needed bushes. Another note: do this in a locked room 
if you can. If you don't, the RNG *will* dump a wererat or a dark elven spider factory 
into your lap at an inoppurtune moment, leaving you to hack and slash through the bodies 
and miss perhaps several generations of herb growth.

As for the overall usefulness of each herb--well, reasonable minds will differ. Following 
are my own subjective opinions. Spenseweed, stomafillia, morgia root and moss of mareilon 
are the top four, with a definite gap in usefulness between them and curaria and alraunia, 
and another larger gap between those two and pepper petal. I personally rate spenseweed 
and stomafillia at the top because their utility never expires; you will *always* need 
healing and you will *always* need food, but the stat gain twins stop increasing your 
stats at a certain point. My non-troll characters go for spenseweed first, stomafillia 
second; for trolls, the priorities are reversed. If only the two grew on adjacent lines! 
Also, don't pass up the opportunity for a stat gain square, ever, unless you absolutely 
must choose between morgia root and spenseweed. Even then, morgia root *may* be the right 
choice, depending on how early it is (early game, pick morgia, late, pick spenseweed, 
middle is a toss-up), your race and class (mindcrafters and wizards love morgia, brawlers 
*need* spenseweed), and how low your stats are now.

In the middle tier, I prefer alraunia antidote in the *very* early game, as in the initial 
dive from the SMC to the mountain village before my first spider corpse. Once I'm no 
longer scared of pit vipers, my preference changes to curaria mancox so as to safely 
increase my Mana score by munching on kobold shaman. Last and in my mind least is pepper 
petal, which is inferior to spenseweed in almost every way. Spenseweed's use by rubbing 
instead of ingesting allows its use even while bloated, which will happen often if you're 
on the Blessed stomafillia Diet Plan (TM). Pepper petal has an evil twin; spenseweed 
doesn't. I've not observed any significant difference in healing potency between blessed 
pepper petal and blessed spenseweed, but as I often don't even bother to ID a bush I know 
will be pepper petal, I may have missed it. Some may argue that pepper petal is preferable 
to spenseweed for a starving character, but since stomafillia grows on the line above 
pepper petal--i.e. the two are often found together--I don't consider that a compelling 
argument.

Please note that, in those crucial beginning turns, *any* benefical herb (anything but the 
"evil twins") can save your life. If you see an herb bush by its lonesome, fated to die 
next generation anyway, then for heaven's sake, don't stop picking till you see the 
ground! Also, the Alchemy skill can add new wrinkles to prioritizing one's herbs. If you 
happen to know a recipe for a PoGA using only demon daisies and booze, then ignore the 
above paragraphs and GO FOR IT, MAN! Remember that success in the Drakalor Chain often 
comes not by memorizing a bunch of rules and patterns but by thinking on your feet!

One last comment: for an eerily complete catalog of insights into Conway's Life, point 
your web browser to http://www.treasure-troves.com/life/ and learn more than you ever 
knew you needed to know about herb bushes.

-----End of Loves a Dustbin's short treatise on herbs-----


0.13.7 Shops

Shops are rooms in the dungeons inhabited by shopkeepers and stocked with their wares. 
Shops can be general stores selling a variety of items or specialty stores selling only 
one type of item. Shops should always be entered and explored, since viewing the items in 
a shop permanently identifies them. There are guaranteed shops in the game: Munxip's food 
store in Terinyo, Barnabas' shop in Lawenilothehl, Waldenbrook's shop in Dwarftown, 
Leggot's shop in the High Mountain Village and the Great Gift Shoppe in the Casino. 
Others are found randomly in the dungeons. Shopkeepers generally buy items as well as 
selling them. The exception is the Casino shop, which only sells. Specialty storekeepers 
are only interested in purchasing the items they specialize in. Sell Munxip those useless 
kobold corpses!

Shopkeepers will restock their inventory if it is depleted or appears to be depleted. It 
is a good idea to pick up everything in a shop and drop the unwanted items on one square. 
This gives the shopkeeper room to restock. Note that it is necessary for a certain amount 
of game time to pass in order for a shop to restock. PCs with sufficient Perception 
scores and Listening skill levels will hear a message "You hear arcane mumbling." which 
means a depleted shop has been restocked.

Shopkeepers have definite racial prejudices in addition to the special criteria Munxip 
(see sections 1.2.1.2, 1.2.1.3) and Barnabas (see section 1.2.2.1, 1.2.2.2) use. Malte 
Helmert has done some testing regarding this and observed the following: The HMV and 
Lawenilothehl shops were generated 50 times each. The races of the shopkeepers were:

Barnabas: 15x Human, 14x Orc, 13x Troll, 8x Gnome
Leggot: 18x Human, 14x Troll, 9x Gnome, 9x Dwarf

Other races may be possible, with a very low probability.

Quoting Malte's findings:

"The following chart lists the percentage of the "base value" offered by a shopkeeper of 
the race specified in the column to a PC of the race specified in the row. 100% is normal, 
110% is possible if the shopkeeper likes the PC's race very much (mostly if both are of 
the same race), and the value can become as low as 10% if the shopkeeper really hates the 
PC's race.

"Looking at the chart, you see that all non-Hurthling shopkeepers prefer PCs of the same 
race. Hurthlings are the only shopkeeper race that isn't prejudiced, and Hurthlings are 
also the best-liked PC race (there is no race that gives Hurthlings a really bad deal, and 
many give them excellent deals).

"Considering the fact that the most important shopkeeper in the game is a Dwarf 
[Waldenbrook - AW], Orcish and especially Dark Elven PCs appear to have the worst time 
(this is not news, of course)."

Shops can be robbed. This of course has effects on alignment, in addition to putting the 
PC's life at risk. These shopkeepers are maintaining a business in a highly dangerous 
enviroment and are well suited to dealing with those who choose to steal from them. In 
addition to their own very tough nature, they can summon hordes of thugs who attack the 
PC. Shopkeepers are able to detect invisible PCs. The message "-Shopkeeper- stares at 
your position with great intensity." indicates they have detected and are looking at an 
invisible PC. However, this does not happen instantly. Therefore, invisibility can be 
used to rob shops without making the shopkeeper hostile. The PC can enter a shop while 
invisible and pick up items. Anything the invisible PC picks up *prior* to generation of 
the above message can be taken from the shop safely. Therefore, the usual technique is to 
enter the shop while visible, gather up everything in the shop and drop it all as close 
to the door as possible. The PC can then become invisible, pick up everything and leave 
the shop undetected as long as the above message is not generated.

Another technique for robbing shops is available for those PCs who have pets or slaves 
under good control. If a shop is entered and nothing is picked up, the shopkeeper does 
not block the door. The PC can order his pet or slave to stand in the doorway, pick up 
whatever is desired, then :s swap positions with the pet or slave. At that point, getting 
away with the loot is simply a matter of outrunning the shopkeeper and avoiding or 
killing any summoned thugs.

A PC with the Teleportation spell can teleport a shopkeeper out of his shop. Shopkeepers 
are teleportation resistant, so trying this with a wand is usually not successful and a 
waste of the wand's charges.  This results in a hostile shopkeeper and summoned thugs, 
however.  Since it is impossible to choose the destination of the shopkeeper, this is a 
dangerous technique unless the PC is experienced enough to deal with a hostile shopkeeper 
and the thugs he will summon.


0.13.8 Rivers

Introduced in gamma 14, these can be found in the High Kings cave, puppy cave, druid 
dungeon, CoC, ID, UD (Rift?). Like any body of water, they can rust unprotected iron items, 
drench scrolls and spellbooks and drown the PC. Precautions include waterproof blankets, 
a high Swimming skill, water breathing gear (see section 0.12.7), rustproofing iron items 
and freezing the water.


0.13.9 Pools

Drinking from pools can do various magical things to a PC: one can gain or lose *any* 
intrinsic or unnatural aging. It is very possible to be corrupted by drinking from pools. 
Also, hostile snakes or water elementals can come out of pools. The most hunted-for 
ability of pools is the small chance of getting a wish. It has been said that pools with 
the color of the PC's eyes are the most beneficial.


 You feel altered in an eerie way.     Only happens with the pool in the 
                                       Stone Circle.  Causes ~2 corruptions.
 You feel slightly strengthened.       trains Strength
 You feel exhausted.                   abuses Strength and Toughness
 You feel much better.                 Healing
 Nothing happens.                      ?
 Urgh! Poison!                         Poisoned for 2d10 poison effects.
 The water tastes bitter.              Poison, but PC is poison resistant
 Suddenly your ears start to bleed!    +Bleeding state
 Your wounds no longer bleed.          -Bleeding state.
 Your blood seems to cool down.        ? (does not affect healing rate)
 The pool bubbles.                     No room for more snakes?
 The water is suddenly writhing with   Snakes to fight
 snakes!
 You hear hissing sounds.              Snakes, but you are blind
 Lots of vipers burst out of the pool. Vipers + chance of water damage
 You suddenly hear many hissing        Snakes or vipers, but PC is blind
 sounds!
 While you drink small waves seem to   ? (may no longer exist)
 ripple the otherwise calm surface of
 the pool.
 Suddenly a water elemental rises      Water elemental to fight, also 
 from the pool!                        possible water damage
 You suddenly hear roaring waves!      Water elemental, but you're blind.
 You feel younger!                     Removes some effects of unnatural aging
 You suddenly remember your early      Would've undone unnatural aging,
 youth.                                but you didn't have any
 Wow! Pure beer!                       Like potion of booze
 Great! Pure dwarven ale!              Like potion of booze
 You taste bitter bile in your mouth.  -Acid resist
 You swallow hard.                     +Acid resist
 You sweat.                            -Fire resist
 You feel cool.                        +Lvl 1 fire resist
 You shiver.                           -Cold resist
 You feel hot-headed.                  +Cold resist
 You feel shocked.                     -Shock resist
 You hear a voice calling you          +Shock resist
 'Iceberg'                              (also password for Hawkslayer)
 Your stomach stings painfully.        -Poison resist
 Your digestion calms down.            +Poison resist
 You feel cheated.                     -Lucky
 You feel lucky.                       +Lucky
 You feel very bad off.                -Fate smiles
 You feel very lucky.                  +Fate smiles
 Bah! This liquid is extremely filthy! 
 You are wrecked by feverish fits!     +Sick
 You feel relieved.                    -Cursed
 You sense trouble.                    +Cursed
 You start a trip on                   +Cursed
 the road to nowhere.
 You feel elated.                      -Doomed
 You become depressive.                +Doomed
 You feel very very bad.               +Doomed
 You continue the trip                 +Doomed
 on the road to nowhere.
 You feel steady.                      -Teleportitis
 You feel jumpy.                       +Teleportitis
 You suddenly hate the thought of      -Teleport control
 jumping around.
 You suddenly feel like jumping        +Teleport control
 around.
 You feel tired.                       -Sleep resist
 You feel totally awake.               +Sleep resist
 You feel shaken.                      -Stun resist
 You feel very controlled.             +Stun resist
 You feel inflexible.                  -Paralysis AND petrification resist
 You are moved by the sheer pleasure   +Paralysis resist
 of this sip of fluid.
 You feel gnarly.                      -Petrification resist
 You feel flexible.                    +Petrification resist
 You feel like an endangered species.  -Resist death rays
 You feel bold at the thought of       +Resist death rays
 danger.
 Your outfit suddenly looks much       -Invisibility intrinsic, also occurs if PC 
 cleaner.                               has no form of invisibility
 Suddenly you are gone.                +Temporary invisiblity
 You suddenly are visible again.       -Invisibility intrinsic OR -Temporary invisibility
 You feel translucent.                 +Temporary invisibility
 You feel on air.                      +Temporary invisibility
 Your eyes sting for a second.         -See invisible
 Your eyes tingle for a second.        +See invisible
 You suddenly can see yourself.        -Temporary invisibility - note the message may be 
                                        misleading if the PC has permanent as well 
 No effect, as far as you notice.      -Intrinsic invisibility when able to see invisible
 You suddenly are gone.                +Invisibility intrinsic
 You feel dizzy for some seconds.      +Invisibility intrinsic
 You feel corrupted!                    Corrupted!
 A small frog pops up...                Get the frog quest
 A gush of water hits you!              Like water trap.
 You are hit by lots of water.          Same as monster water breath attack
 You slip and fall in!                  Water effects on PC and equipment, 
                                        maybe find money or gem in the water
 The pool suddenly dries up.            Pool disappears

Other things you might experience, though...

 "What do you wish for?"

                                       Stat changes

           Increases                       Stat                            Decreases

 Your muscles feel stronger              Strength                            Your muscles soften
 You feel studious                       Learning                  Thinking seems to get tougher
 Your will seems inflexible             Willpower                          You feel soft-hearted
 Your movements are getting swifter     Dexterity                          You are getting shaky
 Your health increases                  Toughness           It seems that you are getting a cold
 You feel very self-confident            Charisma                              You feel reserved
 Your looks improve                     Appearance                        You are growing a wart
 You feel more in touch with the world     Mana     You are getting out of touch with everything
 Your senses sharpen                    Perception               You seem to get less perceptive

These messages also occur at other times when stats change, for example when gaining an 
experience level or encountering a stat-draining monster.

About a half-dozen pools are guaranteed to be found in Darkforge.


0.13.10 Forges

Forges are the basic pre-requisite for smithing - you also need an anvil, an item to 
improve, a hammer and an ingot of the appropriate metal.

A forge is near-guaranteed to be found in the UD, and guaranteed places to find some 
include Dwarftown and Darkforge.


0.13.11 Hives

Hives are holes in the floor of the dungeon containing hive creatures, either ants or 
bees. Their population is finite. There is a guaranteed ant hive on level two of the 
puppy cave.


0.13.11.1 Ants

Ant hives are simply a source of monsters to be killed with no particular reward 
associated with clearing the hive. Bear in mind that ants dig. Leaving them alone and 
allowing them to dig can be exploited as a source of rocks and possibly gems.

Huge rocks can be used to keep ants from escaping anthills.  When an ant attempts to 
leave an anthill covered by a huge rock, the message "The uncursed huge rock (-10, 10d6) 
seems to be shaking." is generated. Eventually the huge rock is destroyed ("Something 
from below destroys the uncursed huge rock (-10, 10d6)!") and ants can come out of the 
hole again. Sometimes this happens after only a few turns, sometimes it takes more than 
a hundred. Multiple huge rocks are destroyed one after another and thus last longer 
than a single one.


0.13.11.2 Bees

Bee hives are filled with giant bee workers, giant bee warriors and a queen bee. They are 
a source of beeswax, which can be used to plug the PCs ears. This deafens the PC and is 
one way to survive the Banshee level. A bee hive is guaranteed to be generated before the 
Banshee's level. They are also a potential source of gelee royal, which when eaten has a 
variety of beneficial effects: it is very nourishing, heals, increases Appearance and 
cures poisoning. All of these beneficial effects will not be experienced simultaneously, 
of course. Bees have a poisonous attack, which kills the attacking bee. Kicking the hive 
will cause the bees to become enraged and swarm the PC. Kicking the hive apparently 
increases the chance of gelee royal generation, although it is not guaranteed.  Currently 
(in ADOM 1.1.1), bees generated by kicking the hive are considered summoned and therefore 
cannot be sacrificed. This may well be a bug. Be careful of this if you are relying on an 
altar to get rid of bees.


0.13.12 Special rooms and their effects

Courtesy of Bartalak with contributions by FoxRedlum and the newsgroup


0.13.12.1 Permanent effects

Strange lights flicker in this room.
- squares adjacent to the PC will be lit and darkened, changing with every turn
- the Light and Darkness spells do not have their usual permanent effect in these rooms

This seems to be a very dull room.
- this room abuses the Learning stat if stayed in too long
- almost no monsters or items are generated in this room (?)

The floor of this room seems to be very sticky.
- the energy points cost to move is increased by 30%

There seems to be a shifting breeze in this room.
- missile to-hit bonus is reduced by 2/3

The floor of this room is covered with puddles of ancient dried blood.
- bleeding is increased

You get the odd feeling that something is wrong with your perception of this room, 
but can't seem to tell what it is from just looking around.
- the direction for spells, pick pockets and kicking is reversed

This room seems to be filled with a deadly and chilling silence. All sounds are muffled.
- normal monster hits receive a large multiplier, causing many instakills

The air of this room is filled with the smell of carrots.
- drink a potion of carrot juice for +5 Pe, then the smell will disappear

This room seems to be magically charged.
- faster pp regeneration

The air of this room is filled with a very rich flavor.
- satiation level does not go down (the PC doesn't get hungry)

There has been a recent report (4/24/2002) that satiation values do indeed decrease in 
rich flavor rooms, albeit very slowly. A bard who had won the game attempted to read a 
spellbook of Wish in a rich flavor room and failed due to the onset of starvation. After 
eating a blessed stomfillia at the Very Hungry stage, the same bard was able to read the 
spellbook. More details are needed, but it seems that food consumption rate is not reduced 
to zero in these rooms.

The air of this room refreshes you and sharpens your spirits!
- increases healing rate

The walls of this room are made of many small stones of uniform height; they almost look 
 like shelves of books.
- better results when learning spells from books, also faster learning

This room seems to vibrate with life. Insects are crawling everywhere, 
 strange mushrooms cover the walls and moss is growing at the ceiling.
- monster pv is increased, as well as the PC's

This room smells of herbs and antiseptics.
- hp regenerate faster

The aura of this room seems to be devoid of all life!
- hp regeneration rate is reduced to 0

Hundreds of tiny insects are crawling beneath your feet and the whole ground seems to be 
 covered with tiny white eggs!
- breeders reproduce much faster

The air in this room is stale in a highly unnatural way.
- increases spell PP cost by 3x

The atmosphere of this room makes your skin tingle!
- decreases spell PP cost by 20%

This room seems to be incredibly ancient.
- Increases the effect of aging attacks


UNKNOWN:

The skulls of many creatures are embedded in the walls. It's almost like being in the 
grave with them.

The walls and the ceiling of this room are sewn with cracks.
- increased chance of equipment being damaged/destroyed? less turns to mine through walls?

You sense the presence of some supernatural entity of benevolent nature.
- chaotics receive a penalty to rolls?

You sense the presence of some supernatural entity of malevolent disposition.
- lawfuls receive a penalty to rolls?

The walls of this room seem to be made from pure obsidian.
- more chaotic creatures generated? better rolls for chaotics?

This room seems to be tainted by evil.
- more chaotic creatures generated? more chances to get corrupted?

The walls of this room are covered with leering visages of demons of all kind!
- more demons generated? demons are more powerful in this room?

The walls of this room are scarred with signs of many fights.
- monsters are always hostile?

The walls of this room are covered with ancient runes.
- doubles pp recovery rate?

The air in this room seems to be magically charged.

This room is very humid.
- possible rust or water damage?
- possibly killed monsters drop water?

The walls of this room are scarred by the signs of many fights.
Most parts of the room are heavily damaged.

You hear a crunshing sound beneath your feet.


0.13.12.2 One time effects

This room seems to be particularly unholy!
- Temporary blessing is removed - permanent blessing, by crowning, will not be removed.

Upon entering this room you feel a strange magical shock!
- pp is reduced to 0

Images of books and comfortable chairs line the walls. Suddenly the images fade away!
- -1 St, +1 Le

The walls have mirrors with many distortions of your image. You can't stand the sight of 
 your warped self. All the mirrors shatter!
- -1 Pe. If you are very low on hp you can be killed by the shattering.

A variation of these messages:
The walls have mirrors with many distortions of your image. You look great in all of them. 
 All the mirrors shatter!
This was a gray elven barbarian with Ap=20. Charisma was raised from 4 to 5 with no other 
 effect. Other elven PCs have seen the same effect with Ap=19.

The breeze accompanying you causes some ancient bones on the floor to transform into dust. 
You feel a sense of relief.
- apparently restores a few hit points

This room looks like a spa with a mud bath. You are hit in the face by a glob of hot mud! 
Suddenly everything disappears!

- blinds the PC, lowers appearance by 1. Wipe the PC's (F)ace, to raise the PC's appearance 
by 2 for a net gain of 1.

UNKNOWN:

You notice a pale fading ball of light upon entering this room. It quickly disappears.

You hear an eerie wail for a few seconds...

You hear a strange "*TCHUNK*" in your vicinity.
- Reported as meaningless by disassembly of the executable.

A rat scurries between your feet and disappears in a small hole in the ground.

For a few seconds you see a looming shade before you. It points its hand towards you in a 
threatening manner! Then it disappears.


0.13.13 Vaults

Vaults are large rooms, larger than tension rooms. Depending on the variety, they can be 
nearly completely filled with monsters or only partially filled. They vary in danger from 
moderate (a lesser vault full of gnolls and hyenas), a challenge for PCs less than 
experience level ten, to absolutely deadly (a greater vault full of greater undead), a 
challenge for experience level 50 PC's who have already won the game.


0.13.13.1 Lesser vaults

Lesser vaults generally take up about 1/4 of the screen with an 80 x 25 display. They 
come in every imaginable flavor, from gnolls and hyenas to lesser undead to a variety of 
berserkers. Their danger level is relatively low, comparable to a mixed tension room on 
the same level. There is a guaranteed lesser vault on the bottom level of the Puppy Cave 
if you want to see one quickly. The level message "You feel excited." is always generated 
when the PC enters a dungeon level containing a lesser vault.

Here is one possible layout of PC: 6 showing the guaranteed lesser vault in the upper 
right portion of the dungeon level:


                                                  ##############################
                                         #######  #............................#
                                         #.....#  #.##########################.#
                                        ##.....####.#    ###..........###    #.#
                                        #....../.##.#  ###..............###  #.#
     #########     #########            #...####....####..................####.#
     #.......#     #.......#            #...#  ####.##......................##.#
     #.......#######.......###############.##     #.###########...############.#
     #............./......./...........# #.#      #.###########...############.#
     #.......#######.......###########/# #.#      #............................#
     #.......#     #.......#   #.......# #.#      ##############.###############
     #########     #.......#   #.......# #.#                   #.#
                   #.......#   #.......# #.#                   #.#
     ###########################.......###.#####################.#########
     #...../.................../......./.........../......./.....#.......#
     #...<.###############################.#########.......#######.......#
     #.....#                             #.........@.....................#
     #######                             #################################

Another example. The lesser vault is in the southwest quarter of the level. This was on 
D: 6 and contained gnolls and hyenas:

  ############      ###################################### ######### #########
  #..........#      #....................................# #.......# #.......#
  #.####.....########.############################.......###.>.....# #.......#
  #.#  #...../.................................../......././.......# #.......#
  #.#  ##############.############################.......#######/### #.......#
  #.#               #.#                #@......../.......#     #.#   #.......#
 ##.#####           #.#######          #.#################     #.#   ###/#####
##......#########   #.......####       #.#                     #.#     #.#
#.....##........#   #####......#########/#######################.#######.#
##....##.######.####    #...##./....././........./.......................#
##.###########.....#    ###.####.<...###.........#########################
#..# #......##..%..# ####....../.....# #.........#
######......[......###....######/##### #.........#
 ##.........##.......#....#    #.#     #.........#
 #..##########.....###....######.#     ###########
#..##        ########.......%....#
####                ##############

Another example. The lesser vault is in the southeast quarter of the level. This was on 
D: 9 and contained orcs:

     #######################################################################
     #.........................................../......./...../...........#
     #.###########################################.......#######...........#
     #.#                                         #.............+...........#
     #/#######     #############                 #/#############....>@.....#
     #.......#     #...........#                 #..#          #...........#
     #.......#######...........#                 #..#          #############
     #............./...........#                 #..#
     #.......#######...........#       ######### #..############################
     #.......#     #...........#       #.......# #.............................#
     ###/#####     #...........#       #.......# #..#.########################.#
       #.#         #...........#       #.......# #..#.#...............%......#.#
       #/#####     #####/###############.......# #..#.#.####################.#.#
       #.....#         #.......................# #..#.#.%.%........%.......#.#.#
       #.<...#         ######################### #..#.######################.#.#
       #.....#                                   #..#........................#.#
       #######                                   #..##########################.#
                                                 #.............................#
                                                 ###############################

More lesser vault layouts:

           #########
           #.......#
 #######   #.......#########################################
 #.....+   +...............................................#
 #...<.#####.......#############.#########################.#   ######
 #...../@(./.......#           #.#                       #.#   #.....#
 ###################           #/#                       #.#   #.....#
                               #.#                       #.#   #.....#
                               #.#     #########     #####/#####.....#
          ##########           #.#     #.......#     #......././.....#
     ######........######      #/#######.......#     #.......#####/###
  ####..[(..............####   #.[..././...[...#     #.......#    .#
  #./..[...................#####.....###########     #......[#####+#####
  #......[...................../.....#               #......././.......#
  #....[...................###########               ###########....>..#
  ####..................####                                   #.......#
     ######........######                                      #########
          ##########


                                   #########     ######           ############
                                   #.......#     #.....           .../.......#
 ################################# #.......#######.###################.......#
 #.........../..........././.....# #................................./.......#
 #.###########...........###..>..# #.......#######.###################.......#
 #.#       #./...........# #.....# #.........................     .../.......#
 #.#       #.#...........# #####/# #.......#######.###.######     #########/##
 #.#       #.#...........#     #.# #...[...#     #.# #.#                  #.#
 #/#####   #.#############     #.# ###/#####     #.# #.#       ####       #.#
 #.....#   #.#                 #.#   #.#         #.# #.#     ###..###     #.#
 #.>...#   #/###################.#####.######### #.# #.#    ##....[.###   #.#
 #.....#   #       ../...................@.....# #.# #.# ###...##%#...### #.#
 #######   #       ..#####################..<..# #.###.###...# ##*###...###.####
           #        .#                   #.....# #....[....### #..# ###.%......#
           #         #                   ####### #####.###...###.####%..###.####
           #         #                               #.# ###...#.##...### #.#
           ###########                               #.#   ###......###   #.#
                                                     #.#     ###..###     #.#
                                                     ###       ####       ###


          ##########
       ####........####                      ###############################
    ####..[.######....####                   #...../.[........(....../.....#
  ###....##.#....####..[.### #############   #.....###################.>...#
###...####..........####...###...........#   #...../.........]...#   #.....#
#.[.###......[.........###...[...........#   #.....#####.........#   #######
###.(.####..........####...###...........#   #.....#   #.........#
  ###....####....####....### #######/#####   #{#####   #.........#
    ####....######....####         #.#       #.#       #.........#
       ####........####            #.#       #.#       #.........#   #########
          ####.#####               #.#       #.#       #.........#   #.......#
             #[#                   #/####### #.#######################.......#
             #.#                   #.......# #......................./.......#
       #######.#############       #.......# #########################.%.....#
       #.........../][.....#       #.......#                         #.......#
       #.@...#######.>.....#########.......#############################/#####
       #.....#     #]............../......./.............[...........*...#
       #######     #######################################################


                 #######################################################
                 #......[...................}..*................./.....#
     #########   #.......].#########################.........#####.@...#
     #.......#   #.........#                       #.........#   #.....#
     #....>..#####.........###################     #.........#   #######
     #......./.../...........................#     #.........#
     ###/############/######################.#     #####/#####
       #.#          #.#        #.........# #.#         #.#
       #.####    ####.#        #.........###.###########/#####
   #####.[..##  ##....#####    #..........}.*......../.......#
   #.....##..####./##.....#    #.........###.#########.......#
####...#####..../.#####...####.#.........# #.#       #.......#
#...}..###....##....###........########### #/#####   #.......#
#########....[##.....##########            #.(...#   #.......#
       ##.##......##.##                    #..<..#   #########
      ##..###....###..##                   #.....#
     ##..## #....# ##..##                  #######
     #..##  #....#  ##..#
     ####   ######   ####


    ######################
  ###.#.#.#.#.##.#.#.#.#.###                         #######         #########
  #.........[*..(.[.%..*...#                         #.....#         #.......#
 ##.##########..##########.##  ####### ###########   #.....#         #.......#
 #..#.#.[.#..#..#....#.[[#..#  #.....# #.../.....#   #.....#         #.......#
 ##.%.#.#.#........#.#.#.(%##  #.@...###.........#     #/#   #########.......#
  #.#...#....#..#..#...#.#..#  #...../...........#     #.#   #...............#
###.##########(.##########.##  ###+#####.........#     #.#   #.#########/#####
#..*}(..%.*.}........[....*#           #.........#     #.#   #.#       #.#
###[#.#[#.#.#.##.#.#.#.#.###           #.#########     #.#####/##### ###.#####
  #.######################.#           #.#             #.#.........# #.......#
  #.#                    #.#           #.#             #.#.........# #...>...#
  #.#                    #.#           #.#             #.#.........# #.......#
 ##/######################.#############.######  #######.#.........# #.......#
 #...........[./..%....../.....................  ......../.........+.........#
 #.....#########.........#################################.........###########
 #.....#       #........./.............................../.........#
 #######       #####################################################


     #############                       ###########
     #...........#                       #.........#
######........%*.####################### #......@..#########################
#................/............./.[.....# #...........+........./...#.......#
#.##########################.###.%.*...# #####.#.#####.........###.#.......#
#.#                        #.# #.......#     #.#.#   #.........# #.#.......#
#.#                        #.# #.......#######.#.#####.........###.#......(#
#.#                        #.# #......*/...(.................../.../.......#
#.##########################.#########+#######.#.#####.........###.#.......#
#................([.(..............     ......%..#   #.........# #.#.......#
#.############.#############.######     ######.###   ########### #.#########
#.##...[................=.##.#               #.#                 #.#
#.##.#......#...#.......#.##.#               #.#   ########### ###/###
#.##.........[#..........[##.#               #.#   #.........# #.....#
#.##.#......#...#.......#.##.#          ######.#####.........# #..>..#
#.##.[...([.[~............##.#          .........../.........# #.....#
#.############.#############.#################.############### #######
#........../......... .........................#
##################### ##########################


0.13.13.2 Greater vaults

Greater vaults are unmistakable. They take up half of a standard dungeon level. The level 
message "You feel truly excited." is always generated when the PC enters a dungeon level 
containing a greater vault. It is wise to immediately zap a wand of Monster Detection to 
determine the type of vault. They come in a variety of types, including fire creatures 
(fire lizards, red dragons, ancient red dragons, ancient red wyrms), black dragons, white 
dragons, giants (hill giants, frost giants, fomorian giants), undead (vampires, ghosts, 
ghost lords, emperor lichs) and karmics (karmic lizards, karmic dragons, ancient karmic 
dragons). Greater undead and karmic greater vaults are particularly challenging. Some 
players will simply ignore greater vaults of greater undead, even with experience level 
50 PCs. This is despite the fact that the rewards for clearing a greater vault are 
considerable. They generally contain one or two artifacts along with substantial amounts 
of gold, usually well over 100000 gold pieces. This is in addition to any equipment that 
the monsters might drop, which is considerable in the case of a greater vault full of 
dragons. The amount of experience points available from clearing a greater vault is also 
huge.

PCs using good effectivity Frost Bolt or Fire Bolt generally have a fairly easy time 
clearing fire- or cold-based creatures, respectively. However, these ranged spells also 
destroy some of the equipment dropped by the monsters. High level Mindcrafters also have 
a relatively easy time with greater vaults (as long as they are not undead!). Casting 
Confusion Wave followed by (Greater) Mental Wave will clear a vault quickly, no muss, no 
fuss and no equipment destruction. Clearing a greater vault with a pure fighter is much 
more tedious.

Here is an example of a greater vault in the left half of D: 44. It contained fire 
creatures:


###################################### #######################################
#.....%.............%................# #..............................       #
#.##################################.# #/#############################       #
#.#................................#.# #.............^......./.....# #       #
#.#%.############################..#.# #..>..#################.....# #########
#.#[.##.##.#####.......####.##.##..#.# #.....#     #.......# #.....#
#.#..##.##.##............##.##.##..#.# #######     #.^.....# #.....###########
#.#..##(#.................*..#.##..#.#####         #.......# #....././.......#
#.#..#.@........................#..#.....######### #.......###/#######.......#
#.#..#...*.....*.........*[.....#..#.###./.......# #......./...#     #.......#
#.#..#..........................#..#.# ###.......# #####/#######     #.......#
#.#..#..........................#..#.#   #(......#     #.#           #.......#
#.#..#..........................#..#.#   #.......#######.#########   #########
#.#..#############..#############..#.#   #................./.....#
#.#.................%..............#.#   #.......#######.###.....#
#.################..################.#   #...............# #.....#
#....................................#   ################# #######
######################################


Note that this map displays an almost guaranteed feature of greater vaults - hidden 
rooms. Directly to the north of the PC is a 1 x 3 space. This was originally a hidden 
door and a 1 x 2 room containing a monster guarding an artifact, now lying on the floor. 
To the east is a fomerly secret 1 x 1 room. On the other side of the vault are two 
additional formerly secret rooms. The three that did not contain an artifact each 
contained 30,000+ gold pieces.

Greater fire creature vaults are not always in this configuration. The hidden rooms vary 
in location according to the layout.

More greater vault layouts:


This particular greater vault does not contain small hidden rooms, although the doorway 
into the central chamber is initially hidden.


       ########################          ###########################
     ###......................###        #......./........./.......#
    ##...............[..........##       #.@.....###########.......#
   ##*?[..[=.}....(..............##      #.......#         #.......#
  ##.$.%..[.......................##     #.......#         #.....[.# #######
 ##....[...################.../....##    #.......#         #.......# #.....#
##.........#..../.........#.........##   #########         #####.#/###...>.#
#......[...#~(......[*[...#.[......}*#########                 #.#.........#
#....../'.[#.....([.%.......[..*...(.........#########         #.###########
#...[....[[#....[.%((.....#..........#######./...'...#         #.#
##/[...?...#..............#.(.......##     ###..(....#         #/#########
 ##........################........##        #.......#         #.........#
  ##.........................]....##         #.......###########.........#
   ##............................##          #......./........./.(.......#
    ##...[%.....................##           ###################.........#
     ###!.....................###                              #........%#
       ########################                                ###########


The hidden rooms in this greater vault are the ones containing the miscellaneous 
[%(*}* items. There is a very good chance of finding an artifact in the inner room.


     #######           ######### ####### ######## ######               ########
     #.....#           #.......# #.....###......# #....#               #......##
     #.....#############...>...###.<.../........###....####     ########.......#
     #...../..........*/......././..@..#............(........   ...............#
     #/#############################/###########.######################.######.#
     #.#                           #.#         #...........[[[..[.......#    #*#
     #.#     ###########   #########.#         #.######################.#    #.#
     #.#     #.........#   #.......#.#         #.#....................#.#    #.#
 #####/#######.........#   #.......#.###########.#...........[[.......#.######.#
 #...%./...../.........#   #............................................%......#
 #....%#######.........#   #.......#.###########.#....................#[######.#
 #.....#     #.........#   #.......#.#         #.##########.###########.#    #.#
 #.....#     #.........#####.......#.#         #....[...[.[.............#    #.#
 #.....#     #........./...........#.#   #######.###################.##.######.#
 #######     #######################.#####.......#      #.....######.##../.....#
                                   #............##      #[%(*}*..(..(###.......#
                                   #######......#       #.....###.[..# #......##
                                         ########       ####### ###### ########


0.13.14 Royal treasuries

Royal treasuries are small hidden rooms generally found in the upper parts of the CoC. 
Their presence is indicated by the "You hear the steps of the royal guard." or "You hear 
the sound of falling coins." level messages. They are disconnected from the rest of the 
rooms on the level and thus can only be enterd by tunneling or teleportation. The royal 
guard within will not be hostile towards PCs that simply pick up the gold. Attacking the 
royal guard is not really worthwhile. It does not curse or doom, but is a chaotic act. 
Note that eating the corpse of a royal guard curses the PC.


0.13.14 Danger levels and top trap types

By Dayid Byron

Numbering the traps per the list in the GB:

0 Light trap
1 Corruption trap
2 Stone block trap
3 Alarm
4 Arrow trap
5 Acid trap
6 Pit - this pit is distinct from the other in that it contains vipers
7 Spear trap
8 Teleportation trap
9 Water trap
10Fireball trap
11Pit - simple pit, no vipers

In the list the first number is the danger level, then the top trap
type number.  For any Caverns of Chaos levels the danger level equals
the dungeon level and the top trap type is equal to (level x 5) -1

So, for example, on D:1 the trap that you would find in the top left
hand corner of the screen, if you could get there and make one, is
an arrow trap (trap number 4).  Within these lists the ttt just increases
by 5 each time.

3*  7 Shortcut
40  0 Dwarf Hall 1
45  5 Dwarf Hall 2
 3 10 Wilderness
 1  3 Terinyo
20  8 Water Dragon Lair
20  1 Dwarven Graveyard 1
24  6 Dwarven Graveyard 2
 1 11 Village Dungeon 1
 1  4 Village Dungeon 2
 2  9 Village Dungeon 3
 2  2 Village Dungeon 4
 3  7 Village Dungeon 5
 4  0 Village Dungeon 6
 8  5 Village Dungeon 7
18 10 High Kings' Tomb
 5  3 Gremlin Cave
18  8 Above Dark Forge
25  1 Dark Forge
30  6 White Unicorn Glade
40 11 Black Unicorn Glade
 3  4 HoleInTheWall
24  9 ToEF 1
25  2 ToEF 2
26  7 ToEF 3
27  0 ToEF 4
 1  5 Mad Minstrel's Clearing
** 10 SMC
 1  3 Old Barbarian's Clearing
12  8 Pyramid 1
15  1 Pyramid 2
18  6 Pyramid 3
12*11 Ogre Cave
14  4 Rift 9
16  9 Rift 8
18  2 Rift 7
19  7 Rift 6
20  0 Rift 5
24  5 Rift 4
28 10 Rift 3
35  3 Rift 2
40  8 Rift 1
30  1 Library
+   6 The ID
 1 11 Wilderness level (eg Plains, Forest)
25  4 Quickling Tree
40  9 Stone Circle
48  2 SIL
 4  7 Dusty Level 1
 8  0 Dusty Level 2

(*) I don't know if the danger level of the Shortcut level varies
with which CoC level it corresponds to - I've only seen S3.
(**) The danger level of the SMC is roughly equal to the PC's level.
(+)  The danger level of the ID is equal to the level of the ID up
to a maximum of 45.

 1 10 Druid Dungeon 1
 1  3 Druid Dungeon 2
 2  8 Druid Dungeon 3
 2  1 Druid Dungeon 4
 3  6 Druid Dungeon 5
 4 11 Druid Dungeon 6
 6  4 Druid Dungeon 7
 6  9 Unremarkable Dungeon 1
 6  2 Unremarkable Dungeon 2
 7  7 Unremarkable Dungeon 3
 7  0 Unremarkable Dungeon 4
 8  5 Unremarkable Dungeon 5
 8 10 Unremarkable Dungeon 6
 9  3 Unremarkable Dungeon 7
 9  8 Unremarkable Dungeon 8
 5  1 High Mountain Village
++  6 ChAoS
14 11 High Kings 1
15  4 High Kings 2
16  9 High Kings 3
17  2 High Kings 4
18  7 High Kings 5
 1  0 Puppy Cave 1
 2  5 Puppy Cave 2
 3 10 Puppy Cave 3
 3  3 Puppy Cave 4
 4  8 Puppy Cave 5
 6  1 Puppy Cave 6
48  6 Unreal Dungeon 1
48 11 Unreal Dungeon 2
48  4 Unreal Dungeon 3
48  9 Unreal Dungeon 4
48  2 Unreal Dungeon 5
48  7 Unreal Dungeon 6
48  0 Mana Temple
48  5 Blue Dragon Caves 1
48 10 Blue Dragon Caves 2
48  3 Blue Dragon Caves 3
48  8 Blue Dragon Caves 4
48  1 Blue Dragon Caves 5
18  6 ????
41 11 Scintilating Cave 1
42  4 Scintilating Cave 2
43  9 Scintilating Cave 3
44  2 Scintilating Cave 4
45  7 Scintilating Cave 5
46  0 Scintilating Cave 6
47  5 Scintilating Cave 7
48 10 Scintilating Cave 8
48  3 Scintilating Cave 9

(++) ChAoS' corruption rate is special.  Something like 30-50 points
per action.  Not sure if the 90 day limit makes a difference. At any
rate it is not the standard amount for a danger level 48 dungeon.

16  1 Ancient City
26  6 Minotaur Maze 1
27 11 Minotaur Maze 2
28  4 Minotaur Maze 3
29  9 Minotaur Maze 4
30  2 Minotaur Maze 5
31  7 Minotaur Maze 6
35  0 Minotaur Maze 7
xx xx False Maze Levels
xx xx False Maze Levels
xx xx False Maze Levels
xx xx False Maze Levels
xx xx False Maze Levels
xx xx False Maze Levels
xx xx False Maze Levels
xx xx False Maze Levels
xx xx False Maze Levels
xx xx False Maze Levels
xx xx False Maze Levels
xx xx False Maze Levels
xx xx False Maze Levels
xx xx False Maze Levels
20  3 Bug Infested Temple
40  8 Bug Temple Cave

(xx) The false Minotaur levels have a danger level equal to the 
equivalent real Minotaur level.  ie between 26 and 31.  Their
ttt varies.  The progression of the table above does hold, but
since you can't tell one false level from another other than by ttt
I didn't think it was worth writing them down.  I've not seen
14 false Minotaur levels.  There is space for 14 but I've only
seen 12 so far.  If 12 is the maximum there are only 172 locations.


0.14 Tips and tricks


0.14.1 Recharging wands

There are many ways to recharge a depleted wand. The common ways are to dip the wand 
into an appropriate potion or read a scroll of charging.  Only the type of potion and 
its status affects the number of charges. The type, status and rusy/nonrusty nature of 
the wand do not matter.

Some results compiled by Petri Sihvola:

Potion or scroll      Status      Trials   Average charges   Min/Max charges

Boost mana            Blessed       60           5.8               3/9
                      Uncursed      60           3.9               2/6
                      Cursed        60           1.9               1/3
Booze                 Blessed       60           3.1               2/4
                      Uncursed      60           1.9               1/3
                      Cursed        60           1.5               1/2
Mana                  Blessed       60           7.5               3/11
                      Uncursed      60           4.6               2/8
                      Cursed        60           2.7               1/4
Scroll of charging    Blessed       60           6.0               3/9
                      Uncursed      60           4.1               2/6
                      Cursed        60           1.8               1/3


Potions of raw mana do *not* work.  Note that potions of mana can be used to permanently 
increase the PCs mana stat; the player may want to save them for that purpose.

Wizards can also recharge wands at level 32, only once per wand though.

Wands of wishing can't be recharged. For these, you'll want to use the chance to wrench 
a final charge from the wand, destroying it.

See also potions of raw chaos below.


0.14.2 Huge rocks and anvils

These heavy items have a nice use: crashing doors. Throw one at a door and enjoy the 
sight of a broken door before you. There is a very nice side benefit to this: any trap 
that the door was protected with is destroyed along with the door. The trap does not go 
off as it is destroyed.

Huge rocks can be used to keep ants from escaping anthills. Whenever an ant wants to 
escape, you get a message like "The uncursed huge rock (-10, 10d6) seems to be 
shaking.". Eventually the huge rock is destroyed ("Something from below destroys the 
uncursed huge rock (-10, 10d6)!") and ants can come out of the hole again. Sometimes 
this happens after only a few turns, sometimes it takes more than a hundred. Multiple 
huge rocks are destroyed one after the other and thus last longer than a single one.


0.14.3 Statues

If your PC is really, really buff, a statue can be wielded as a melee weapon, but the 
real use for statues is to kick it until it breaks down, making it yield a magical wand. 
Statues can be generated by petrifying enemies.

Stephen White has done some research on the b/u/c status of statues re wand generation. 
His PC kicked 200 statues with each status to pieces. The results were as follows:

Blessed statues: 62 wands generated, about 1/3
Uncursed statues: 17 wands generated, about 1/10
Cursed statues: 3 wands generated, about 1/100


0.14.4 Potions of raw chaos

Items can be dipped in potions of raw chaos in order to transform them into new ones. 
Dipping items (other than artifacts) into a PoRC will transform it into a random item of 
the same type - useful for brass items. Equipped items are removed (even if cursed) and 
cursed. There is a chance of spilling the potion, though, and this badly corrupts the PC, 
about 4 corruptions, and causes 100 - 200 HP of damage.  Needless to say, this can kill 
a low-level PC.  Never drink these!

Wands dipped into a PoRC will turn into a wand with a different number of charges. This 
is one way to recharge wands with 0 charges left. The type of wand, however, is 
unpredictable.

Potions of raw chaos can be created by dipping any corrupting artifact (those containing 
the essence of chaos and corruption + Moon Sickle) into any ordinary potion.


0.14.5 Potions of exchange

In addition to swapping stats, these can polymorph monsters, and items, to another type.


0.14.6 Regeneration of HP and PP: potions of troll blood and raw mana

When drinking potions of insight or casting the Revelation spell, there
is some information about Power Point and Hit Point regeneration.

Those two values lie between 5 and 200, the lower the number, the faster the
regeneration. They can be affected by drinking potions of troll blood
(for hit points) or potions of raw mana (for power points). Their
effectiveness depends on their blessed/uncursed/cursed status:

Item Status   Modification to Regneration Rate

blessed       -8 (on average, effect varies)
uncursed      -4 (on average, effect varies)
cursed        +4 (on average, effect varies)

Bottom line: always bless your potions of troll blood or raw mana.

HP regeneration time

standard value:          50 - the value for humans and hurthlings
Dark Elves:             +20
Gray Elves:             +15
High Elves:             +10
Gnomes:                 -2
Dwarves:                -5
Orcs:                   -10
Drakelings:             -20
Trolls:                 -30
Healers:                 halved
most characters:        -1 (based on Toughness?)
some characters:        -1 once more (based on Toughness?)

The modifiers are applied in the order listed here.
E.g. Trollish Healers with exceptional toughness get a starting
regeneration time of (50 - 30) / 2 - 1 - 1 = 8.

It seems like the last to -1 modifiers are based on toughness, but there
does not seem to be an obvious relationship; a random element may be 
involved as well.

PP regeneration time

standard value:          50 - the value for humans and drakelings
Trolls:                 +50
Dwarves:                +40
Hurthlings:             +10
Orcs:                   +5
High Elves:             -10
Gnomes:                 -10
Dark Elves:             -20
Gray Elves:             -25
most characters:        -1 (based on Mana?)
some characters:        -1 once more (based on Mana?)

How regeneration works

The PC always receives one HP/PP once the appropriate time has passed. 
Healing/Concentration will regenerate additional points at random 
intervals.

Regenerative capabilties from these sources are additive.

HP gained by Healing in 100 turns (approximately):

no Healing:       0
Skill Level 10:   0.8
Skill Level 20:   1.6
...
Skill Level 100:  8.0


HP gained naturally in 100 turns:

standard character (1 HP/50):   2.0
1 HP/40:                        2.5
1 HP/30:                        3.3
1 HP/20:                        5.0
1 HP/10:                       10.0
1 HP/5:                        20.0

As can be seen, many blessed potions of troll blood will get you more
than good healing skill, but having Healing at 100 is best.

For regaining PP naturally, the same values apply. However, 
Concentration is better than Healing since it grants more points than 
Healing.  The value is also increased even more at specific points 
mentioned in the manual. Since there does not seem to be an obvious model 
for this, the values are simply listed:

PP gained by Concentration in 100 turns (approximately):

no Concentration:   0
Skill Level 50:    10.96
Skill Level 74:    13.84
Skill Level 75:    26.86 x2
Skill Level 89:    32.42
Skill Level 90:    43.18 x4/3
Skill Level 99:    46.48
Skill Level 100:   59.00 x5/4

So potions of raw mana are nice, but not as important as having a high
Concentration skill.

There don't seem to be any corruptions influencing mana regeneration.
Neither mana battery nor close attunement to astral space have any effect.

Regeneration occurs at the same rate whether walking around or resting. 
Regeneration time is measured in *turns* (at least for simple actions like 
walking, fighting or resting), not game time. High speed or seven league 
boots lead to exactly the same regeneration rate in turns. Thus regeneration 
is faster with respect to game time if the PC is fast or walking around with 
seven league boots. If a PC with low walking energy cost wants to spend the 
minimum amount of game time regenerating, the best bet is to walk around 
while regenerating.

The Cursed, Doomed, Lucky and Fate Smiles intrinsics do not make a
difference for regeneration purposes.

Hunger status has no effect on regeneration.

Trolls have food consumption doubled.
Monks have food consumption halved.
Farmers have food consumption halved starting from level 12.

Things that are still missing and interesting to investigate:
* Information about corpses (trolls and the like for HP regeneration,
  maybe some creatures for PP regeneration)
* the effect of the starsign of Candle
* the effect of items (such as necklaces of rapid healing)
* the effect of the corrupted tissue corruption
* the effect of being burdened/strained/very strained/overburdened on
  regeneration and food consumption
* the effect of artifacts carried and worn on food consumption
* information about the various special rooms that affect regeneration


0.14.6.1 Troll corpses

Thanks to Malte Helmert for this section.

There are four types of troll corpses (troll, troll berserker, troll 
chief, troll king). They all yield either of two messages when eaten by 
a non-troll:

a) "Urg! Foul meat! Your blood suddenly courses faster through your veins!"
b) "Urg! Foul meat!"

Message a) indicates that HP regeneration time decreased by one
Message b) indicates that HP regeneration time did not change

For troll PCs, the messages are slightly modified:

a') "Yum! Your blood suddenly courses faster through your veins!"
b') "Yum!"

The behaviour is the same: a' decreases HP regeneration time, b' does not.

No corpse can reduce the regeneration time below 6. Trying this always 
gives message b) or b'), respectively. This differs from potions of 
troll blood, which always result in the "Your blood suddenly curses 
faster..." message, even if the regeneration time is already minimal. 
Note that the lower threshold is 6, unlike the threshold for potions of 
troll blood, which is 5. This means that trolls, who cannot make use of 
potions of troll blood, cannot lower their regeneration time to 5, 
unlike the other races.

The probabilities of getting a decrease in regeneration time depends 
only on the B/U/C status of the corpse. Specifically, it does not 
depend on:
* Current regeneration time (no difference between the lowest 
eligible value 7 and the unrealistically high value 300)
* Player race (human vs. troll)
* Cooked/uncooked status
* Type of troll corpse (troll, troll berserker, troll chief, troll king)

Results indicate that blessed corpses work in 100% of the cases 
(although, like all corpses, they cannot lower it below 6), and uncursed 
or cursed corpses work in 50% of the cases. There was no observable 
difference between uncursed and cursed corpses:

94 blessed troll corpses: 94x decrease
621 uncursed troll corpses: 314x decrease, 307x no decrease
361 cursed troll corpses: 187x decrease, 174x no decrease

There was no difference in weight or satiation value of the various kinds 
of troll corpses. All corpses weigh 240s if not cooked, irrespective of 
B/U/C (rotting) status, and 228s (= 5% less) if cooked, again irrespective 
of B/U/C (rotting) status.

An uncursed corpse yields 500 units of satiation (like a large ration). 
This is doubled if the corpse is cooked (presumably this holds for other 
corpses too, but this needs further verification). The resulting value 
is modified by +25% for blessed corpes and -50% for cursed corpses, just 
like for other food items. So, e.g. a blessed cooked troll chief corpse 
gives 500 * 2 * 1.25 = 1250 units of satiation.

SUMMARY

Item: [troll/troll berserker/troll chief/troll king] corpse
Weight: 240s (-5% if cooked)
Nutritional value: 500 (*2 if cooked, *1.25 if blessed, *0.5 if cursed)
Effect when eaten [blessed]: If HP regeneration time is >= 7, it is 
reduced by 1
Effect when eaten [uncursed/cursed]: If HP regeneration time is >= 7, it 
is reduced by 1 with a probability of 50%
Message when eaten [non-troll PC]: "Urg! Foul meat!"
Message when eaten [troll PC]: "Yum!"
Additional message if and only if HP regeneration time was reduced: 
"Your blood suddenly courses faster through your veins!"


0.14.7 Freezing water

Pretty straightforward: use some cold source while standing next to a water square and 
zap over it. Frost/Nether Bolt, Ice Ball/Freezing Fury, or a wand of cold qualify. Ice 
is fragile, of course, and there's a 2000 stone limit for your stuff's weight.  
Exploding ice vortices will freeze all water in the range of their blast.  Likewise, 
monsters that cast Frost Bolt, Ogre Magi for instance, can freeze water.  However, 
monsters that breathe ice, white dragons for example, do not freeze anything when their 
breath crosses water (probably a bug).


0.14.8 Safe places to store items

Locked rooms

Locked rooms are one of the safest places to leave items in ADOM.  With the current 
state of the monster inventory system (they can pick up items but not use them), a 
monster will never be able to unlock a door.  Several monsters can smash doors, however.  
Some monsters (balors spring to mind) can teleport into locked rooms.

The Old Barbarian's glade

The Old Barbarian's glade is a decent place to store items. He is the only monster ever 
generated in this location, so nothing randomly generated is going to run away with the 
PC's stuff. If the PC leaves items far away from the Old Barbarian, he will not have time 
to find them prior to the PC's next visit.

The Mad Minstrel's clearing

In ADOM 1.0.0, the Mad Minstrel will leave his hut, and will pick up items.  The safety 
re storage is therefore similar to the Old Barbarian's glade.  No other monsters are 
generated in his clearing, so leaving items far away from the Mad Minstrel should not 
allow him time to find them prior to the PC's next visit.

The Dwarven Mystic's room in Dwarftown

The ultimate in security, if the PC has not destroyed it with a wand of destruction (see 
section 2.5.4). After 'C'hatting wih the Dwarven Mystic, he disappears, leaving a 2 x 2 
room that cannot be entered except by teleportation. Since there are no teleporting 
monsters found in Dwarftown (except for the greater daemon - kill it) this is as safe as 
storage areas get.  Other Dwarftown inhabitants  can, in extremely rare circumstances, be 
generated in this room.  Since they will be nonhostile, killing them is not a good idea.  
Teleport them out if possible.  Alternatively, use the Ogre Cave (see below).

The Ogre Cave in Dwarftown

Once the Ogre Cave is cleared, monster generation there is slow or nonexistent.  Items 
can be left adjacent to the stairway.  If the PC leaves immediately, no time passes on 
the level, so there should be almost no chance the items will be disturbed.

The secret room in the HMV

Another room accessible only by teleportation, therefore almost perfect theoretical 
security. A monster teleporting into this room has never been seen.

Sharad-Waador's room

Items left in Sharad-Waador's room never seem to be disturbed. Sharad-Waador never moves 
from the square where he is initially generated (unless he is attacked or the PC reneges 
on the deal to take the quest), and no time passes on the level between the PC's departure 
and reemergence from the blue dragon caves. This is very important, since the player may 
want to leave important non-artifact equipment behind in order to avoid its potential 
destruction in the blue dragon caves (see section 3.9).


0.14.9 Seven league boots

Seven league boots can dramatically reduce the time needed to walk around in the 
wilderness, depending on their blessed/uncursed/cursed status:

blessed: time needed for walking is divided by 6
uncursed: time needed for walking is divided by 3
cursed: time needed for walking is multiplied by 2

Blessed/uncursed/cursed seven league boots also alter the base energy cost for movement 
outside the wilderness from 1000 to 500/750/1200, respectively. Seven league boots should 
be blessed immediately. They enable the PC to outrun anything other than quicklings.  
Consequently, some players regard seven league boots as the most important item in the 
game, and will use a wish to obtain them, if necessary.


0.14.10 Stethoscopes

'U'sing a stethoscope, you can determine a monster's statistics precisely. Furthermore, 
using a stethoscope, you can easily find secret doors: scan a wall block, and if it 
"sounds hollow", it's a secret door.

In addition to monsters and secret doors, stethoscopes can also be used on closed doors 
to find out the number of monsters behind it. The messages are:

"Silence." - corridor

(this message is shown even if the corridor is full of monsters, so be warned)

"You hear nothing." - empty room

"You hear some low-volume sounds." - 1 monster in the room

"You hear some sounds." - 2-3 monsters

"You hear many sounds." - 4-8 monsters

"You hear lots of sounds." - 9 or more monsters (tension rooms and rooms filled with 
                               breeders or summoned creatures also give this message)

See section 0.14.11 below concerning a Healer's special ability with stethoscopes.


0.14.11 Undocumented character abilities

All characters gain to-hit and to-damage bonuses when fighting as a true berserker, which 
means no armor can be worn and Tactics must be set to berserk. Shields are acceptable, 
any worn armor is not. Level 40 and higher barbarians get additional bonuses on top of 
this when fighting as a true berserker.

Note that Monks do not seem to receive this true berserker bonus.

Monks gain the ability to kick down walls at experience level 13.

Merchants always specialize in a certain item: potions, rings, scrolls, or wands. This 
specialization allows them to identify any item in that category on sight.  Merchants also 
have a unique ability to use coins as missiles (in ADOM 1.0.0, dopplegangers cannot 
deflect a merchant's thrown coins).

Healers have the ability to use a stethoscope without consuming any game time.  All other 
classes consume one turn of game time when using a stethoscope.


0.14.12 The weight and appearance of objects

Note the weight of objects. Many valuable objects have a unique weight. For instance, 
there is only one type of sword with a weight of 35s, one amulet weighing 7s, one amulet 
weighing 8s, one girdle weighing 30s, etc. In general, lighter items are better. Items 
with odd, unusual or rare weights are often better than their more commonly observed 
counterparts.

Certain special items are also have a unique color. Slaying quarrels will be brown rather 
than the silver of normal quarrels. Metal-shod quarterstaves (whether iron-, mithril-, 
adamantium- or eternium-) are silver; normal quarterstaves are brown. This is especially 
important to remember for eternium-shod quarterstaves, since they have the same weight as 
wooden quarterstaves.

0.14.13 Fortune cookies, rumors and the babblings of Yggaz

Rumors in general are available from several sources: fortune cookies found randomly in 
the dungeons, beggars, Torgall the innkeeper in Dwarftown, the book The Collected Works 
of Confucious and Yggaz the fool in Terinyo. Yggaz also regularly spews what seems to be 
complete nonsense; it is included at the end of the list below. There is also a special 
room effect where a mouth will appear on a wall and deliver a fortune cookie message. 
The list, along with some explanation:

Some late additions:

0. They say that Fire is the only element living on the surface.

Refers to the Tower of Eternal Flames on the Wilderness map.

0. They say that drinking holy water with bland rations will make them taste better

0. They say that Mana is a kind of side trek.

The Mana Temple is located in a side branch of the unreal cave system.

0. They say that fury makes you less stubborn.

0. Quidquid latine dictum sit, altum viditur.

What is said in Latin is looked upon highly. [thanks to Kassandra Velez for translation]

0. Join DARK (*D*ragons *a*gainst *r*easonable *k*illing).

0. MADE: Mindcrafters Against Drunken Explorers.

0. Note: Don't forget to throw all the poisoned cookies away.

0. They say that every coin has two sides.

0. They say that it might be useful to remain persistent with uncharged wands.

Wrench the final charge from them if there is no means of recharging them.

0. They say that rusted electrical items might be dangerous to the user.

Rusty wands of (ball) lightning can be hazardous to the PC's health.

0. Smoking is bad for your health!

0. Remember to write something on this cookie.

Not on the cookie, on blank scrolls (if the PC can take the possible consequences).

0. They say that patience is the better part of valor.

0. They say that dark elves are especially good in the night.

0. They say that many wands depend on the power of their wielder.

Willpower is a factor when zapping wands.

0. Stoma Pubis enjoys throwing anvils at opponents.


Fortune Cookie messages

1. A sharp axe is easier to wield than a sharp wit.

Weapons are more effective than Learning in battle.

2. All roads lead to chaos, in the end.

To the chaos gate, falling to the forces of Chaos, or becoming a chaos being.

3. Always consider the consequences of yer deeds lest ye be surprised.

The PCs actions will affect the game.

4. Always watch your back!

Especially since PCs have 360 degree vision.

5. An anvil is nothing more then an oversized ignot of iron.

And can be melted just like one.

6. Being light as a feather makes you very rifty.

The rift is even more dangerous when burdened.

7. Care for more intelligent monsters.

They could be useful - and more dangerous.

8. Didst ye ever eat a hag? Try it, it's very fulfilling!

And cursing.

9. Don't believe everything *they* say.

Not all rumors are true.

10. Eating a demon daisy will make you a demon lover.

Nonsense. Demon daisies poison.

11. Feeding rust monsters is costly but definitely worth it.

Feed them with thrown metal items - quarrels are a good choice.

12. Gift shops are overpriced, unless you use a five finger discount.

The Great Gift Shoppe in the Casino is overpriced - unless it is robbed.

13. If you are doomed, this will be the last fortune you ever read.

False, although Dooming can be difficult to cope with.

14. If you eat the heart of a Dragon, you will share in its strength.

The PC gains a resistance corresponding to the dragon's color.

15. If you lick a Karmic Lizard, you can get high.

If the PC eats a karmic corpse, it grants luck-related intrinsics.

16. In the land of eternal darkness, light must come from within.

In the Gremlin Cave, if the PC retrieves the Phial of Caladriel,
the light it produces uses up the PC's power points.

17. It takes an iron stomach to eat a black dragon steak.

Acid resistance, that is.

18. Living sacrifices are the most valuable of all.

Not always. Gold and artifacts are safer.

19. Look for strange items.

The si.

20. Putting undead to rest with holy water indeed is a lawful act.

Griff Bloodax, yes. Don't waste holy water on them otherwise.

21. Rifts are deep.

You'll fall down (apparently always in g16p2).

22. Some gems harbor magical powers.

Darkness, light, knowledge, power, health and fire spring to mind.

23. Sting and Needle... Needle and Sting... twins they are and united they should be.

They become *much* more powerful when dual-wielded.

24. The coin of chaos has two faces -- power and corruption.

The corruption far outweighs the power.

25. The Mad Minstrel harbors a dark secret.

He knows the location of the Scintillating Cave.

26. They say that a good memory might pay.

Remember the first kill.

27. They say that a paragon of Order must not violate his beliefs by any means.

Although obtaining the Platinum Girdle still seems buggy.

28. They say that an empty stomach is one's worst enemy.

Avoid starvation.

29. They say that at times mindless rage might save your life in fights.

Berserk tactics.

30. They say that at times things can get zorky.

There's a lot of Zork references.

31. They say that attacking shopkeepers is bad for your karma.

Cursing and Dooming may result depending on alignment.

32. They say that balors are the gatekeepers of Chaos.

There are nine on the level containing the Chaos Gate.

33. They say that being able to read is very useful when visiting the library.

Literacy is necessary if the PC wants to read anything found in the Library.

34. They say that Berzio potions are useful for taming monsters.

True.

35. They say that blessed items improve ones eyesight.

If they are potions of carrot juice or necklaces of the eye.

36. They say that blessed potions of extra-healing might be a real boon.

True.

37. They say that boozed bozos can be very helpful.

Give the fool some booze.

38. They say that bugs can be really nasty.

Both programming ones and claw ones.

39. They say that burning torches can be very dangerous.

They deal nice damage.

40. They say that champions may pray for more favors then ordinary people.

True.

41. They say that converting an altar is difficult without losing ones faith.

Not if the PC uses gold pieces.

42. They say that companions fear darkness.

True - they can be accidentally attacked.

43. They say that controlled teleportation is really great.

True.

44. They say that corpses mark the realm of death.

There's a lot of corpses on the Banshee level.

45. They say that corrupted things can be your boon and your doom.

A chaos creature's corpse will yield a potion of cure corruption from
Guth'Alak, but being attacked by corrupting chaos creatures is very nasty.

Alternatively, this may refer to artifacts which contain the essence of Chaos 
and Corruption. They are very powerful (boon) but will corrupt the PC (doom).

46. They say that cursed potions of invisibility might have strange effects.

They blind you.

47. They say that cursed thieves picks might do strange things.

By triggering traps?

48. They say that distortion is the way to godhood.

Probably a leftover from earlier gammas, when a PC had to be extremely
corrupted to achieve the chaos god ending. Still true for champions of
balance and chaos.

49. They say that drinking black potions during the night corrupts your soul.

If the black potion is a potion of raw chaos.

50. They say that eating beings of true evil corrupts your very essence.

True.

51. They say that eating humans is evil.

Apparently not, from recent tests.

52. They say that eating magic-wielding monsters might be a boon for your mana.

True.

53. They say that elemental altars can only be converted by the most faithful.

That is, champions of Order or Balance.

54. They say that elves trade strength of body for speed.

Dark elven corpse effects.

55. They say that essence of mareilon moss is proof against the undead.

No, it increases Dexterity.

56. They say that excitement is a messenger of battle.

Messages about feeling excited mean a vault is present on the level.

57. They say that faster blood means faster recovery.

True.

58. They say that fire is the most violent element. Be as resistant as you can.

There are three levels of fire resistance. But acid deals more damage.

59. They say that fortunes must be followed by the incantation 'in bed' to work.

Reference to real-world fortune cookies.  Old joke about adding 
'in bed' to the end of the message to make them more humorous.

60. They say that gambling is bad for your finances.

There is a requirement to spend more than is won in the Casino.

61. They say that gods like sacrifices of food and valuable stuff.

True.

62. They say that good gamblers know which coins they have to use.

More accurately, which slot machines...

63. They say that graveyards are dangerous places.

Strength and Toughness might go down, age might go up.

64. They say that greater vaults are hiding places for artifacts.

True, but watch out for the guardians.

65. They say that green pools contain deadly slime.

Nonsense.

66. They say that herb bushes grow according to magical patterns.

Conway's rules of life, not magic.

67. They say that herbs have strange effects.

Good or bad.

68. They say that holy water might bear fruits.

This probably refers to the ability to create herbs with holy water (see section 0.13.6).

69. They say that hurthlings don't like shoes.

Shoes reduce their Dexterity.

70. They say that Infinity does not permit to visit any place twice.

It's impossible to visit an ID level twice.

71. They say that it is good for your survival if you can't hear death coming.

With death equaling the Banshee.

72. They say that it is not wise to leave ones cause after being crowned to be a champion.

True.

73. They say that it might come in handy to discover a use for useless potions.

Very true.

74. They say that Khelavaster is still alive.

Maybe. It depends on what has happened in the particular game.

75. They say that kicking a stuck door helps.

If it isn't trapped.

76. They say that kicking stairs might be bad for your health.

It might collapse the dungeon.

77. They say that kicking stairs helps to train your strength.

Don't.

78. They say that killing cats is bad for your karma.

It does not affect luck-related intrinsics, but makes the Cat Lord angry.

79. They say that killing friends won't help you finding new ones.

Killing friendly monsters is a chaotic act; attacking the inhabitants of Dwarftown will (generally) make the whole town hostile.

80. They say that libraries are especially useful for wizards.

They find every spellbook available in the game.

81. They say that long jumps require small moves.

Might refer to alignment changes via small gold sacrifices at non-aligned altars.

82. They say that many cursed items cause bad luck.

They do not explicitly affect the luck-related intrinsics in
most cases, but are definitely a pain to deal with.

83. They say that merchants are really well-spoken thieves.

At least they know how to take away your money.

84. They say that merchants are well-versed in handling coins.

True. Even throwing them.

85. They say that monsters tamed by bards will never willingly leave.

True.

86. They say that monuments can hold dark secrets.

This probably refers to the Infinite Dungeon, which was once a monument to Law. Chaos has transformed it into its current condition, and it holds a dark secret, the location of the Sceptre of Chaos (as well as Filk, but this message probably predates Filk). Might also refer to the Stone Circle, where the Crown of Chaos is located.

87. They say that nobody ever heard the wail of the Banshee more than once.

The Banshee's wail instakills.

88. They say that not all herbs must be eaten.

Some must be 'U'sed, some are harmful.

89. They say that once you have opened the final gate there is no way back.

When the D: 48 staircase points down, there's no way back until
the chaos gate is closed.

90. They say that pools contain mysterious secrets.

Among other things.

91. They say that potions of toughness tend to remove your hungry feelings.

True.

92. They say that praying at altars of your deity is helpful.

No, *sacrificing* at coaligned altars is helpful.

93. They say that quests are noble and just.

Not all of them.

94. They say that repetitive requests are frowned upon by the gods.

Praying too often will result in an angry deity.

95. They say that rubbing moss of mareilon onto your skin might get you moving.

It increases Dexterity.

96. They say that sacrifices can be dangerous.

Especially live ones on a noncoaligned altar.

97. They say that shopkeepers base their prices upon racial preferences.

Waldenbrook hates Dark Elves.

98. They say that shopkeepers sometimes try to cheat the customer.

True.

99. They say that shops are dangerous at night.

Shopkeepers don't see the PC pick up items in the dark, but the PC still must pay.

100. They say that Sis might enhance your creativity.

By making the PC think of uses for them.

101. They say that skeletons like bones.

Giving them bones heals them.

102. They say that some items are useful when worn shortly before special moments.

Some items give nice resistances and abilities not often needed.

103. They say that some statues have magical bones.

Statues may yield wands when broken by kicking.

104. They say that some stuff needs a lot of blessing to improve.

One blessing (of seven league boots, rings of djinni summoning, 
potions of gain attributes, rings of the fish) is enough.

105. They say that some wands are not very reliable.

True - rusty wands of ball lightning, for instance.

106. They say that smashing statues might yield magical wands.

True.

107. They say that swamp hydras are tough food.

And poisonous.

108. They say that the ancient dwarf knows a lot about quests.

He has six.

109. They say that the banshee transformed after losing her beloved husband.

True.

110. They say that the cat lord finds no fault with ye if ye has never harmed any cat.

True.

111. They say that the dungeons of mystery consist of 100 levels.

Except now it's the Caverns of Chaos with 50 levels.

112. They say that the forces of Law built a monument to Infinity.

But Chaos twisted it into the ID.

113. They say that the gods do not yearn for material wealth.

Nonsense. They *love* money!

114. They say that the gods greatly favor living sacrifices.

True, as long as they aren't summoned or bred.

115. They say that the great rift is very dangerous for almost everyone.

True.

116. They say that the guild of industrious brutal muggers writes really confusing manuals.

The IBM Guild Manual permanently confuses.

117. They say that the home of the banshee is ruled by eternal decay.

Actually, corpses never rot there.

118. They say that the king hid a lot of gold in these dungeons.

There are some royal treasuries.

119. They say that the library charges high fees.

Nonsense.

120. They say that the lofty nature of some writing sets is influenced by the degree of magic invoked with it.

Writing scrolls of chaos resistance is costly.

121. They say that the mint-flavored juice distilled out of morgia roots improves stamina, slakes thirst and conceals bad breath.

Eating morgia roots increases Willpower and Toughness.

122. They say that the radiance of chaos will corrupt you the faster the deeper you descend.

True.

123. They say that the secret to becoming a Chaos God is hidden in the Drakalor Chain.

True.

124. They say that there are many gems deep under the mountains.

True.

125. They say that there is a secret level guarded by many powerful monsters which contains several artifacts.

Greater vaults generally contain an artifact or two.

126. They say that thick gauntlets are great for isolating your hands.

... from poison.

127. They say that tiny caves can be very large.

Especially the ID.

128. They say that those who manage to empty a pool, will receive a wish.

Nonsense.

129. They say that those who have too many friends also have too many enemies.

A PC with many companions may find that they fight amongst themselves.

130. They say that those who hear the wail of the banshee are doomed.

Not doomed, dead.

131. They say that to be a champion of one's cause is very valuable when using ancient magic.

True.

132. They say that to leave the animated forest you will have to reach the corner opposite the enterance.

133. They say that too much chaos essence corrupts thy inner self.

134. They say that true berserkers fight naked.

135. They say that using artifacts costs a lot of energy.

All true.

136. They say that when you hear a "Hurumph!" you'd better start to run.

A Dorn Beast. Be paralyzation resistant.

137. They say that you might find gems on the deep levels.

You can find gems anywhere.

138. They say that you need a lot of leverage to stop the forces of Chaos.

Two levers, actually.

139. They say that you need a strong will to enter the great rift.

True (see section 2.22).

140. They say that you need persistence and peace to truly profit from religious scriptures.

Tracts are buggy, nobody benefits from them. The "persistence and peace" probably refers to the fact that tracts are difficult to read, so the PC must not be disturbed by monsters. Interestingly, however, teleportitis does not bother PCs trying to read tracts.

141. They say that you need to be an expert climber to survive the great rift.

Climbing 100 is required.

142. They say that you need to be very experienced to enter the great rift.

Experience level 18.

143. They say that you only can be the champion of your deity if you are very close to your deity.

Or extremely.

144. They say that you should not slow down in your final fight.

Avoid being hit by writhing masses of primal chaos.

145. They say that you should seek the heart of the mountains.

There's a neat library in the middle of the mountains.

146. They say that you should try to investigate the potential uses of beeswax.

For the Banshee's level.

147. They say that you should wish for charisma.

148. They say that you should wish for friends.

149. They say that you should wish for knowledge.

150. They say that you should wish for strength.

151. They say that you should wish for toughness.

152. They say that you should wish for wealth.

153. They say that you should wish for willpower.

For stats, yes. For friends, no. For money, no.

154. They say that you should wish for wishes.

Never.

155. They say that you will feel the corrupting incursions of Chaos.

Unavoidable if the PC lives long enough.

156. They say that you'll have to pull mightily to plug the chaotic intrusions.

Pull two levers.

157. They say that you will need a weapon of mass destruction to come closer to your goal.

A *wand* of destruction helps.

158. They say that your piety depends on your disposition towards all gods of your pantheon.

True.

159. They say that wands of knocking might split your skull.

They never deal any damage.

160. They say that white dragons suffer from a bad cold.

They are vulnerable to fire and grant cold resistance when eaten.

161. They say ye cannot shoot yourself, no matter how hard ye try.

The PC cannot shoot his doppleganger "self" since they are immune to missiles.
The PC can shoot his real self easily, with lightning bolt, death ray, magic
missile, wands of ball lightning or wands of far slaying.

162. This cookie will make you pay a high price.

Nonsense.

163. This is a joke.

Nonsense.

164. Those of Trollish Blood must drink from the Bloody Pool.

Nonsense.

165. Those who guard artifacts are deadly enemies.

Usually.

166. Those without overwhelming piety won't affect elemental altars.

The PC must be a champion of Order or Balance.

167. To be heavy is not very nifty in a deep rift.

Even worse than normal.

168. Ye dost not need to find some kind of amulet to save the world.

Reference to the original Rogue and its descendants.

169. Your termination is long due.

Right. So is the termination of this list.

Yggaz's babbling:

1. A lord might come, he will kill some, others he will beat and that will be neat.

2. Age is power, fulfillment is a shower.

3. Baba's my mother, Stalker my father and I'm the eternal wanderer.

4. Convenience does not mean ease of use!

5. Discover the beginning and you will have found the end.

Discover the origin of the Chaos incursion into Ancardia and you reach the end of the game.

6. Healers are strange people - they enjoy it if you throw stuff at weak ones...

One way to satisfy Jharod.

7. Follow the course, ride the horse, eat the bean and feel pretty lean.

8. Life's a boon and ye art a goon!

9. Remember: wherever you go, there you are!

10. Search the bard and hit him hard!

May refer to Filk.

11. Search the garden, harvest the treasures and take some measures.

Probably refers to herbs and arranging them into stable patterns.

12. Sting the bee and rewarded will be thee.

Hives are more likely to leave gelee royal after kicking them.

13. Swing the anvil and smash the unyielding.

14. The avatar I was... now the fool I am. Heed the warning.

Don't become a fallen champion?

15. ...the right stuff that is.

16. The tiny island is quite magical... isn't that tragical?

Refers to the island in Terinyo.

17. The warning I was... now the fool I am. Heat the warning.

18. Wait till the dawn of time and yer problems will be solved.

19. Wild my babbling might be, mild my being might be...

20. Yagga Yagga Yeek Yeek!


0.14.14 Day and date effects

Starting a game on...                    results in the message...                     and has the following effects... 
---------------------                    -------------------------                     --------------------------------
Creator's Day (TB's birthday, July 2nd)  You feel that starting your adventure on      PC starts with Lucky and Fate Smiles; 
                                         Creator's Day was a good idea.                also, if the day falls on a Monday, 
                                                                                       HP are not reduced.
Christmas Eve (December 24th)            A lone star leads you to this remote valley.  PC starts with Fate Smiles. 
New Year's Eve (December 31st)           You feel well prepared for the coming year.   PC starts with six blessed potions of booze.
Any Friday the 13th                      You feel unlucky.                             PC starts Cursed.
Any Monday                               You feel slightly exhausted today.            PC starts slightly low on HP.


There are of course Ancardian day and date effects as well, which are well covered in 
the manual.


0.14.15 The opening question system

Work on this is progressing.  See the web pages.


0.14.16 Talents

Thanks to Laszlo for the list.

  Alphabetical list of talents:

Affinity with Axes
Affinity with Boomerangs & Scurgari
Affinity with Bows
Affinity with Clubs and Hammers
Affinity with Crossbows
Affinity with Daggers & Knives
Affinity with Maces & Flails
Affinity with Polearms
Affinity with Slings
Affinity with Staves
Affinity with Swords
Affinity with Thrown Axes & Hammers
Affinity with Thrown Daggers 
Affinity with Thrown Rocks & Clubs
Affinity with Thrown Spears
Affinity with Twohanded Weapons
Affinity with Whips
Aggressive
Alert
Ambidextrous
Basher
Beast of Burden
Boon to the Family
Brawler
Careful
Charged
Charming
Defensive Fighter
Dextrous
Dodger
Durable Magic
Eagle-Eyed
Extended Magic
Extremely Hardy
Extremely Skilled
Far Shot
Fey-Blooded
Filthy Rich
Good Book Caster
Good Book Learner
Good Learner
Good Looks
Good Shot
Greased Lightning
Great Book Caster
Great Book Learner
Great Learner
Hardy
Healthy
Heir
Immune to Pain
Iron Skin
Keen Shot
Learned
Lightning Shot
Long-Lived
Long Stride
Master Packager
Mechanically Inclined
Melee Weapon Master
Mighty Aura
Mighty Strike
Miser
Missile Weapon Master
Mithril Skin
Natural Berserker
Natural Trader
Pious
Porter
Potent Aura
Powerful Strike
Quick
Quick Shot
Saint
Scout
Shield Expert
Shield Master
Shield Specialist
Silver Tongue
Sixth Sense
Skilled
Stealthy
Steel Skin
Strong
Strong Aura
Strong Healer
Strong Legs
Strong Magic
Strong of Will
Strong Thrower
Tough
Tough Skin
Treasure Hunter
Very Careful
Very Hardy
Very Pious
Very Quick
Very Skilled
Very Wealthy
Wealthy

   --- STARTING TALENTS --- (all these have a prerequisite of Level 1)

Note that you only start with 1-6 talents. Since several of the
STARTING TALENTS are prerequisites, you need to consider your choice 
of Level 1 talents very carefully. Since a +Attribute talent is 
worth half a (blessed) potion of Attribute, it's probably only
worthwhile to take them as prerequisites if needed. Some +Attribute
talents, however, can be quite useful for early-game survival, and
should be considered.

   ALERT -- +1 to Perception.
   Prerequisites: Level 1. 

Rating: 3 (4 for archers)
Prerequisite for: Treasure Hunter(9), Missile Weapon Master(3-7)

Prerequisite for Missile Weapon Master and Treasure Hunter. Treasure
Hunter is generally accepted to be one of the most desirable (if not
_the_ most desirable) talents, making Alert a populer Level 1 choice.
See Missile Weapon Master for a discussion on viability.
If you don't want Treasure Hunter or Missile Weapon Master, Alert is
of marginal utility; Perception is one of the less useful attributes,
and is fairly easily increased. A mid-range Perception score (12-18)
is a prerequisite for a number of talents, none of them very useful,
except possibly Great Book Caster.
Note that this talent is slightly more useful if you play ADOM on 
higher than 80x25 resolutions.

   CHARMING -- +1 to Charisma.
   Prerequisites: Level 1.

Rating: 1 (2 for male characters and Bards)
Prerequisite for: Heir(3-10)

Prerequisite for Heir. If you don't have at least 3 starting talents,
or if you simply don't want Heir, this talent is next to useless.
While Charisma is not particularly easy to raise, it's almost 
completely useless for everyone except Bards (for whom it is of
medium importance).
Charisma is a prerequisite for Silver Tongue and Natural Trader,
neither of which is worth getting, either.

   DEXTROUS -- +1 to Dexterity.
   Prerequisites: Level 1.

Rating: 3

Not a prerequisite and probably not worth it. Dexterity gives speed, 
DV, and missile weapon to-hit (and possibly damage, anyone know for
certain?), but Dextrous is a dead-end talent and the specialized
talents for speed, DV, and missile bonuses are much more powerful.
Dexterity is the prerequisite for a number of useful talents. None 
of them need above 18 Dex, though, and that shouldn't be too 
difficult to come by in the early-to-mid game.

   FEY-BLOODED -- +1 to Mana.
   Prerequisites: Level 1.

Rating: 3 (2 for non-spellcasters)

Not a prerequisite. Of some use to spellcasters with low mana 
scores (troll wizards, for example). If your starting Mana score 
is low, this might be somewhat helpful in reaching the prerequisites 
for the magical talents. Since Mana is probably the easiest 
attribute to train, however, I'd advise against taking this talent.

   GOOD LOOKS -- +1 to Appearance.
   Prerequisites: Level 1.

Rating: 1 (2 for female characters)

Not a prerequisite, and a proufundly worthless talent. Appearance is 
the least useful attribute for anyone.

   LEARNED -- +1 to Learning.
   Prerequisites: Level 1.

Rating: 4 (5 for illiterate characters)

Not a prerequisite, and fairly easy to train for most characters.
Learning does help with a good number of things, but if your 
character automatically gets the Literacy skill, probably not worth 
it. Even if he/she doesn't, 1 point is unlikely to make a difference.

   STRONG -- +1 to Strength.
   Prerequisites: Level 1.

Rating: 4 (5-7 for melee characters)

Not a prerequisite. Strength can be trained very quickly at low 
levels, but slows down somewhat later. It is also one of the most
useful attributes for most characters. For this reason, melee
characters might possibly want to consider this talent.

   STRONG OF WILL -- +1 to Willpower.
   Prerequisites: Level 1.

Rating: 3 (4 for Mindcrafters)
Prerequisite for: Melee Weapon Master(5-7), Saint(2)

Prerequisite for Melee Weapon Master (and Saint, which is next to
usealess). If you don't want Melee Weapon Master, Willpower is of
medium-to-high importance (high for spellcasters, medium for everyone
else). It's easy to raise into the twenties by the early-to-mid game
(if you know how), though, making Strong of Will a bad choice except 
as a prerequisite.

   TOUGH -- +1 to Toughness.
   Prerequisites: Level 1.

Rating: 4

Not a prerequisite. Would be a fairly good choice if there wasn't a
reliable method of raising Toughness into the mid-twenties by the
early-to-mid game. Still might be worth considering for characters 
with a very low starting toughness, but the defensive talents are
overall probably better for early survival.

   WEALTHY -- Three times the normal starting money.
   Prerequisites: Level 1.
 
   VERY WEALTHY -- Two times the normal starting money.
   Prerequisites: Wealthy, Level 1.

   FILTHY RICH -- Two times the normal starting money.
   Prerequisites: Very Wealthy, Level 1.

Rating: 1 (3 for Merchants)

These three talents are rather useless. All three of them 
together will only get you twelve times your starting money 
(or 24 times, with Boon to the Family), which only counts as 
a lot at the very beginning of the game. 
One exception: merchants with a lot of starting talents can 
actually get quite a lot of money with these talents, potentially
opening up several interesting options for them in the early game.
Overall, these talents are still probably a suboptimal choice.

   BOON TO THE FAMILY -- Twice normal starting money.
   Prerequisites: Level 1. 

Rating: 1
Prerequisite for: Heir(3-10)

A prerequisite for Heir. Otherwise even worse than Wealthy.

   HEIR -- Receives a special magical item inherited from his family.
   Prerequisites: Boon to the Family, Charming, Level 1. 

Rating: 3-10 (depending on class; 10 would be for Bards)

Has two prerequisites, which means you must have at least 3 starting
talents to get it. Its usefulness is strongly dependent on your class.
For Bards, the reward is approximately worth a Wish, and is one of
the most powerful items in the game. Heir gifts for other classes
will eventually become obsolete, but usually help with early-game 
survival a great deal. It's _three_ starting talents, though, so 
consider it carefully.

   SKILLED -- +2 to all initial skill values.
   Prerequisites: Learning 9+, Level 1.
 
   VERY SKILLED -- +3 to all initial skill values.
   Prerequisites: Skilled, Learning 12+, Level 1.

   EXTREMELY SKILLED -- +5 to all initial skill values.
   Prerequisites: Very Skilled, Learning 15+, Level 1.

Rating: 3

You can only get these talents if you have a decent Learning, 
which is precisely when you don't need them. At low levels,
skills go up fast. Leave these talents alone.
Note also that these talents are currently (ADOM 1.1.1) 
buggy and can crash the game if taken.

   LONG-LIVED -- the PCs life span is extended by 30%.
   Prerequisites: Level 1.

Rating: 1-5 (Depending on race; 1 for elves, 5 for trolls)

PCs with short life spans might want to consider this. 30% is
not a lot overall, but might just be the bonus that saves your
life against Ghost Lords. It's a dead-end talent, though, so
consider it carefully.

   --- MELEE TALENTS ---

   AFFINITY WITH AXES -- +2 to hit with axes.
  
   AFFINITY WITH CLUBS & HAMMERS -- +2 to hit with clubs and hammers.

   AFFINITY WITH DAGGERS & KNIVES -- +2 to hit with daggers and
      knives.

   AFFINITY WITH MACES & FLAILS -- +2 to hit with maces and flails.

   AFFINITY WITH POLEARMS -- +2 to hit with polearms.

   AFFINITY WITH SWORDS -- +2 to hit with swords.

   AFFINITY WITH WHIPS -- +4 to hit with whips.

   AFFINITY WITH STAVES -- +2 to hit with staves.

   AFFINITY WITH TWOHANDED WEAPONS -- +2 to hit with twohanded
      weapons.

Rating: 6 (5 for spellcasters)
Prerequisite for: Melee Weapon Master (5-7)

If you want Melee Weapon Master, you must take three of these.
Otherwise, I suggest waiting until you're sure about what weapon(s)
you want to use in the long run; otherwise, it's a wasted talent.
+2 to hit is not a lot, but with the new ADOM combat system, you 
can never have too much (or even enough) of a to-hit bonus, and 
every little bit helps. The +4 for whips is nice, but still doesn't 
make whips worthwhile, generally speaking.

   MELEE WEAPON MASTER -- +3 to hit and damage in melee combat.
   Prerequisites: At least 3 melee weapon affinities, Defensive
   Fighter, Strong of Will

Rating: 7 (5 for spellcasters)

This is a very expensive talent: it has 7 prerequisites. Still,
since four of them (with the exceptions being Strong of Will and
two of the three affinities) are useful for a melee fighter, it's 
probably worth getting.
For spellcasters, DV and PV are much more important than to-hit
and damage, which makes Melee Weapon Master a less attractive 
proposition.

   BRAWLER -- +2 to hit in unarmed melee combat.
   Prerequisites: Strength 13+.

Rating: 1 (7 for Monks and Beastfighters)

Not a prerequisite. If you're playing an unarmed fighter, 
probably worth getting.

   STRONG LEGS -- Kicking in doors is much easier. +2 to kick damage.
   Prerequisites: Level 1.

Rating: 1 (4 for Monks)

Not a prerequisite. Useless for anyone but monks; you very rarely
need to kick down a door quickly. Since not even Monks kick much,
even after getting the circular kick ability, and the damage bonus
is not at all spectacular, it's probably best to ignore this talent.

Note that this talent may or may not help with kicking down walls
quickly, for a Monk of level 13 or above.

   AGGRESSIVE -- +1 to hit in melee.

Rating: 5 (2 for spellcasters)
Prerequisite for: Natural Berserker (4-8)

If you want Natural Berserker, you must get this. If you don't, 
you'd probably be better off with other combat talents. +1 is
not much at all.

   NATURAL BERSERKER -- +2 to hit and damage when berserking.
   Prerequisites: Aggressive.

Rating: 4 (may be 6-8, depending on playstyle).

Normally, one doesn't usually spend much time in Berserk mode, and
this talent isn't powerful enough to justify doing so. If, however,
you play a berserkering melee fighter, this can be a fairly powerful
talent.

   AMBIDEXTROUS -- +2 to hit when fighting with two weapons.

Rating: 6

Not a prerequisite. Probably a good idea to get it if you're planning
on fighting with two weapons.

   BASHER -- +1 to hit and damage with weapons weighing more than 
      100 stones.

   POWERFUL STRIKE -- +2 to hit and damage with weapons weighing more
      than 100 stones.
   Prerequisites: Basher, Strength 13+.

   MIGHTY STRIKE -- +3 to hit and damage with weapons weighing more
      than 100 stones.
   Prerequisites: Powerful Strike, Strength 18+.

Rating: 9 (situational, 6 for spellcasters)

Unfortunately, most worthwhile weapons are 100s or lighter. Even with
these talents, the only weapons that are worthwhile are maces of 
destruction and some artifacts. Also, some weapons with the "heavier-
than-normal" prefixes, as well as some non-higher-metal ego weapons, 
might fit into this category.
If you actually manage to get one of these weapons, these talents can
be _very_ worthwhile. It's definitely a gamble, though, and none of
them can even be wished for, except the mace of destruction. For this
reason, I suggest only getting these talents if you've actually found
one of the above weapons, or you know you'll get it (quite a few of
the artifacts that fit the bill are guaranteed, including, notably,
the ToTRR). Getting these talents eariler is a very risky gamble.

   --- MISSILE AND THROWN WEAPON TALENTS ---

   AFFINITY WITH BOWS -- +2 to hit with bows.

   AFFINITY WITH CROSSBOWS -- +2 to hit with crossbows.

   AFFINITY WITH SLINGS -- +2 to hit with slings.

   AFFINITY WITH BOOMERANGS & SCURGARI -- +4 to hit with thrown
      boomerangs and scurgari.

   AFFINITY WITH THROWN DAGGERS -- +3 to hit with thrown daggers.

   AFFINITY WITH THROWN AXES & HAMMERS -- +3 to hit with thrown axes
      and hammers.

   AFFINITY WITH THROWN ROCKS & CLUBS -- +3 to hit with thrown rocks
      and clubs.

   AFFINITY WITH THROWN SPEARS -- +3 to hit with thrown spears.

Rating: 5 (4 for spellcasters, 7 for archers)
Prerequisite for: Missile Weapon Master(3-7)

If you want Missile Weapon Master, you must take three of these.
Otherwise, I suggest waiting until you're sure about what missile 
weapon(s) you want to use in the long run; otherwise, it's a wasted 
talent. Your to-hit bonus for missile weapons is less of a critical 
issue than for melee weapons, which is why these got a lesser score. 
For an archer, though, they're still very useful.

   GOOD SHOT -- +1 to hit and damage with missile weapons.

   KEEN SHOT -- +2 to hit and damage with missile weapons.
   Prerequisites: Good Shot, Dexterity 13+.

   EAGLE-EYED -- +3 to hit and damage with missile weapons.
   Prerequisites: Good Shot, Archery 80+, Dexterity 18+.

Rating: 6 (4 for spellcasters, 9 for archers)

These are excellent bonuses for an archer. Other characters will
want to consider how much they will be using missile weapons.
Note that Keen Shot is _not_ a prerequisite for Eagle-Eyed, just
for Missile Weapon Master. If you can, buy Eagle-Eyed first.

   MISSILE WEAPON MASTER -- +3 to hit and damage in missile combat.
   Prerequisites: At least 3 missile weapon affinities, Keen Shot,
   Alert

Rating: 5 (3 for spellcasters, 7 for archers)

This is the same as Eagle-Eyed, but much more expensive. It has 6
prerequisites, 3 of which (Alert and two of the three affinities)
are not very useful. Characters other than archers will probably
want to pass on this one.

   QUICK SHOT -- Missile attacks require 10% less energy.
   Prerequisites: Keen Shot, Quick.

   LIGHTNING SHOT -- Missile attacks require 10% less energy.
   Prerequisites: Quick Shot, Archery 60+.

Rating: 7 (9 for archers, 5 for pure spellcasters)

If you're planning on using missile weapons at all, the bonus
speed from these talents is excellent.

   FAR SHOT -- Missile attack ranges are increased by 20%.
   Prerequisites: Keen Shot, Strength 10+.

Rating: 2 (3 for archers)

If you're not going to be primarily using missile attacks, the
extra range isn't going to come into play much. If you are, then
you should have more than sufficient range from your weapon skill 
and the Archery skill. Avoid.

   STRONG THROWER -- +2 range with thrown weapons.
   Prerequisites: Strength 12+.

Rating: 2 (5 for throwers, 7 in special circumstances)

This is somewhat better than Far Shot (+2 range is usually better
than +20%; if not, then you really don't need to be increasing your
range anyway). It really becomes useful if you want to use unorthodox
throwing weapons like Hammer of the Gods or Long Sting. In those 
cases, the +2 range can actually be very useful. I suggest waiting
until you're sure that's what you want to do, and then considering
buying this talent.

   --- DEFENSIVE TALENTS ---

   CAREFUL -- +1 to DV.

Rating: 5 
Prerequisite for: Very Careful(4-7), Defensive Fighter(7), 
   Good Book Caster(5-8)

DV is very important for all classes in the mid-to-late game. +1 is
not much by itself, but Careful is a prerequisite for Very Careful, 
for the Defensive Fighter->Dodger chain, as well as for Good Book 
Caster. All great talents.

   VERY CAREFUL -- +3 to DV when fighting very defensively or like a
      coward.
   Prerequisites: Careful.

Rating: 4 (7 for spellcasters, may be 5-7 for others depending on
playing style)

Most players probably won't be fighting very defensively a lot, and 
this talent isn't good enough to make it worth doing so. If, however,
you're a spellcaster, or you generally fight at the Very Defensive
setting, this can be a useful bonus.

   DEFENSIVE FIGHTER -- +2 to DV.
   Prerequisites: Careful, Quick.

Rating: 7
Prerequisite for: Melee Weapon Master(5-7), Dodger(7)

+2 DV is nice for all classes. This is also a prerequisite for two
useful talents.

   DODGER -- +2 to DV.
   Prerequisites: Defensive Fighter, Dodge 75+

Rating: 7

Same as Defensive Fighter. Not a prerequisite for anything, though.

   SHIELD SPECIALIST -- +1 to DV when wielding a shield.

   SHIELD EXPERT -- +2 to DV when wielding a shield.
   Prerequisites: Shield Specialist, Shield Weapon Skill 3+

   SHIELD MASTER -- +3 to DV when wielding a shield.
   Prerequisites: Shield Expert, Shield Weapon Skill 6+

Rating: 7

These are only worth buying if you plan on getting all three. 
Otherwise, Careful and Defensive Fighter are probably better.
If you use a shield, though, these three give a +6 bonus to
DV, which is excellent.

   HARDY -- +3 hitpoints.
   Prerequisites: Toughness 10+.

Rating: 4
Prerequisite for: Very Hardy(4-7), Tough Skin(5-7)

Prerequisite for the 7 talents below. If don't want them, Hardy
probably isn't worth it; 3 hitpoints doesn't count for too much 
even in the early game, and quickly becomes negligible.

   VERY HARDY -- +6 hitpoints.
   Prerequisites: Hardy, Toughness 15+.

   EXTREMELY HARDY -- +9 hitpoints.
   Prerequisites: Very Hardy, Toughness 20+.

Rating: 4 (5-7 in the early game)

If you have a Toughness of 20 or more, 18 extra hitpoints aren't 
going to mean much, especially in the late game. Your talents would 
probably be better spent elsewhere. If you feel that the early game
is going to be the most difficult part for your character, though,
then these talents might just mean the difference between life and
death.

   TOUGH SKIN -- +1 to PV.
   Prerequisites: Hardy, Toughness 12+.
 
   IRON SKIN -- +1 to PV.
   Prerequisites: Tough Skin, Toughness 15+.
 
   STEEL SKIN -- +2 to PV.
   Prerequisites: Iron Skin, Toughness 20+.
 
   MITHRIL SKIN -- +3 to PV.
   Prerequisites: Steel Skin, Dwarf.

Rating: 7 (5 without Mithril Skin)

Debatable. With the current combat system, PV is not as useful as
DV in the mid-late game. If you want to be difficult to damage, 
you're better off using a shield and/or buying the DV talents. 
On the other hand, PV is much more important in the early game.
If you feel that your character is most vulnerable early on, you
might want to give these talents serious thought, even if you
can't get Mithril Skin.
It's a big chunk of your available talents, however; Steel Skin 
is 4 talents fr +3 HP and +4 PV, and Mithril Skin is 5 talents 
for +3 HP and +7 PV.

   IMMUNE TO PAIN -- One point of damage is always negated for all
      attacks. At least one point of damage will be caused 
      nonetheless.
   Prerequisites: Iron Skin, Willpower 15+.

Rating: 5

This is like a point of super-PV, that applies to everything, always.
Unfortunately, it's a single point, and it's a dead-end talent.
Probably not worth it.

   --- MAGICAL TALENTS ---

   POTENT AURA -- +3 power points.
   Prerequisites: Mana 10+

Rating: 3 
Prerequisite for: Strong Aura(4-8), Strong Magic(3-6), Charged(4-7?),
   Strong Healer(4-7), Good Book Learner(4)

This talent is the prerequisite for every single MAGICAL TALENT. By
itself, though, it's not very useful; 3 power points are even less 
impressive a bonus than 3 hit points (see Hardy).

   STRONG AURA -- +6 power points.
   Prerequisites: Potent Aura, Mana 12+.

Rating: 4 
Prerequisite for: Mighty Aura(4-8), Durable Magic(3-4),
   Great Book Learner(4), Good Book Caster(5-8)

Again, not too impressive in itself, but the prerequisite for two
useful talents.

   MIGHTY AURA -- +9 power points.
   Prerequisites: Strong Aura, Mana 15+

Rating: 4 
Prerequisite for: Extended Magic(3-4), Great Book Caster(5-8)

Still not worth it by itself (the 18 mana given by this talent and 
its two prerequisites is a drop in the bucket for any serious
spellcaster), but it is the prerequisite for Great Book Caster
(an excellent talent), and Extended Magic (a not so excellent one)


   STRONG MAGIC -- +2 to all damage caused by spells.
   Prerequisites: Potent Aura, Mana 15+.

Rating: 3 (6 for pure spellcasters)

Not a prerequisite, but can be a useful talent for spellcasters. 
Unfortunately, +2 is not much at all.

   CHARGED -- Regenerates power points at higher speed.
   Prerequisites: Mana 16+, Potent Aura.

Rating: 4? (7? for pure spellcasters)

The rating for this talents depends on exactly _how_ much extra
PP regeneration it gives. If it's the same 20% you get for Healty,
and it's added on _after_ Concentration bonuses, I'd give it a 
rating of 7 for pure spellcasters, 4 for everyone else. It's quite
good, but not quite good enough to be essential.
Note that in the latest version of ADOM (1.1.1), casting spells
from HP is not as good an idea as it use to be, since doing so
abuses the Mana attribute. This makes mana regeneration more 
useful than it used to be.

   DURABLE MAGIC -- all spell durations are increased by the PCs
      current level times 3.
   Prerequisites: Willpower 16+, Strong Aura.

Rating: 3 (4 for pure spellcasters)

Spells this applies to (presumably) are Bless, Slow Monster, 
Invisibility, Strength of Atlas, Farsight, and possibly Scare Monster.
That's not a lot, and most of these spells can simply be recast when
needed, making this a not-very-useful talent.

   EXTENDED MAGIC -- all spell ranges are increased by 2.
   Prerequisites: Mana 24+, Mighty Aura.

Rating: 3 (4 for pure spellcasters)

For bolt spells, a range increase of 2 also means a damage 
increase of 2, IIRC. For this reason and Death Ray, this could have
been a marginally useful talent. Unfortunately, for most spellcasters,
it's tough to get it in the early game, when bolt spells (and this 
talent) would be the most useful.
Note that this talent does _not_ increase the area of effect of ball
spells.

   STRONG HEALER -- +4 to all damage healed by spells.
   Prerequisites: Potent Aura, Willpower 15+.

Rating: 4-6 (7 for pure spellcasters)

This can be a good talent, and not just for pure spellcasters. Its
usefulness wanes in the late game, but early on, it boosts healing
spells by quite a bit. Most characters don't have to heal themselves
very often, but when they do, it's sometimes imprerative that they
heal as fast as possible, which is why this talent is a potential
life-saver.

   GOOD BOOK LEARNER -- PC is 10% more effective when learning 
      spells from spell books.
   Prerequisites: Potent Aura, Good Learner.

   GREAT BOOK LEARNER -- PC is 10% more effective when learning 
      spells from spell books.
   Prerequisites: Good Book Learner, Strong Aura, Great Learner.

Rating: 4

These are just not very good. Together, they give 21%. If they gave
more than that, they could be useful for borderline-spellcasters, 
like paladins. 21% is just not a significant enough boost, though.

   GOOD BOOK CASTER -- Casting spells from books costs only double
      power points.
   Prerequisites: Careful, Strong Aura, Dexterity 14+.

   GREAT BOOK CASTER -- Casting spells from books costs only 50% more
      power points.
   Prerequisites: Good Book Caster, Mighty Aura, Dexterity 18+,
      Perception 15+.

Rating: 7-8 (5 for pure spellcasters)

These can be excellent talents, primarily _not_ for pure spellcasters
(who tend to get enough castings from books anyway, thank you very
much, and have enough mana to cast from books when they need to), but
for characters learning spells at low effectivity through various 
means, then casting the spells via books. Unfortunately, most of these
characters tend to wince at the 2-3 Aura talent prerequisites. Still,
these can definitely be worth considering.

   --- MISCELLANEOUS TALENTS ---
 
   GOOD LEARNER -- Learns very fast. +2% to all experience gained.
   Prerequisites: Learning 10+.
  
   GREAT LEARNER -- Learns extremely fast. +3% to all experience
      gained.
   Prerequisites: Learning 16+.
  
   Rating: 4 (5 for trolls)

Not quite good enough for serious consideration. +5% XP is never
enough for a single level, and spending two talents - 6 levels' 
worth! on this small amount of extra XP seems like a waste.
Charactes with very important class abilities, like Mindcrafters,
could find even this little bit of extra XP useful, but +5% is
just pitifully little.

   PORTER -- Carrying capacity is increased by 10% due to the PCs
      efficient packaging skills.
   Prerequisites: Strength 8+, Dexterity 10+.

   MASTER PACKAGER -- Carrying capacity is increased by 20% due to 
      the PCs efficient packaging skills.
   Prerequisites: Porter, Learning 12+, Perception 12+.

   BEAST OF BURDEN -- Carrying capacity is increased by 30% due to the
      PCs efficient packaging skills and great endurace. 
      Prerequisites: Master Packager, Willpower 12+, Toughness 12+.

Rating: 6 (8 for Monks)

These three talents together give a 71.6% bonus to carrying capacity.
This can be useful for most characters, and is especially critical 
for Monks, who can rarely afford even Burdened status.
If you want them, you should probably buy all three.

   LONG STRIDE -- Movement costs but 950 energy points.

Rating: 7

Faster movement is always good, and this is somewhat cumulative with
other bonuses. Also, unlike speed bonuses, it doesn't affect the XP
you get. Can be invaluable in the early game for outrunning cats (or
any other monster).

   QUICK -- +2 to Speed.

   VERY QUICK -- +3 to Speed.
   Prerequisites: Quick.

   GREASED LIGHTNING -- +4 to Speed.
   Prerequisites: Very Quick, Dexterity 15+.

Rating: 8

Speed is hard to come by, and a hefty +9 is probably worth the three
talents it costs. It does come with an XP hit, but not much.
Quick is also the prerequisite for Defensive Fighter and Quick Shot,
two great talents.

   HEALTHY -- Heals wounds 20% faster.

Rating: 6 (4 for spellcasters)

Anyone with easy access to healing spells will probably not need this
talent. If you're not a spellcaster, though, an extra 20% of natural 
healing can be handy in the early game, especially when you start
without the Healing skill. Later on, it's not that important, so buy
this talent early or not at all.

   SIXTH SENSE -- More easily evades traps.
   Prerequisites: Perception 18+.

Rating: ?

Unfortunately, does not say how _much_ more easily. This can 
potentially be very useful; traps can be a very nasty and unavoidable 
source of equipment destruction, and can even be a serious danger in
the early game.

   MECHANICALLY INCLINED -- All Disarm Traps checks are 10% easier.

Rating: 1

Absolutely useless. Disarm Traps is a low-priority skill in any case,
and 10% is nothing.

   MISER -- Tends to find more gold because he looks more intensely
      for it.

Rating: 4 
Prerequisite for: Treasure Hunter(9)

If you don't want to get Treasure Hunter, it's probably not a good 
idea to take Miser; gold is just not that difficult to come by in 
ADOM, and the easiest ways to get gold are unaffected by Miser.

   TREASURE HUNTER -- Finds more items.
   Prerequisites: Alert, Miser

Rating: 9

Considered by many to be the best talent overall. I estimate that a
character with the Treasure Hunter talent gets about 50% more items 
than one without. The quality of items is unaffected, but 50% is a 
whole lot. Well worth the two prerequisites, in my opinion.

   SILVER TONGUE -- Shop prices are reduced by 10%.
   Prerequisites: Charisma 10+.

   NATURAL TRADER -- Shop prices are reduced by 20%.
   Prerequisites: Silver Tongue, Charisma 14+.

Rating: 3

Again, money is not much of an issue in ADOM, and a 32% drop in 
prices is just not that impressive.

   PIOUS -- Prayers are 5% less expensive.
   Prerequisites: Willpower 15+.

   VERY PIOUS -- Prayers are 5% less expensive.
   Prerequisites: Pious, Willpower 20+.

   SAINT -- Prayers are 5% less expensive.
   Prerequisites: Strong of Will, Very Pious, Willpower 30+.

Rating: 2

These three are ridiculously weak. Prayers being 16% cheaper is a 
very slight effect, and would probably not be very worthwhile even
as a single talent. As the sum of three talents, it's pathetic.
With all three talents, 6 prayers will still cost a bit more piety
than 5 prayers would for a person without these talents. Not 
exactly exciting news.

   SCOUT -- More likely to evade wilderness encounters. Less likely to
      be ambushed.
   Prerequisites: Dexterity 10+, Perception 13+.

Rating: 5 (3 for spellcasters)

Can be somewhat useful in the very early game. Until and unless the
uber-jackal effect is fixed, this can retain its usefulness for non-
spellcasters. Still not a worthwhile pick, though; any character past
level 20 ought to have a solution to wilderness ambushes.

   STEALTHY - All Stealth checks are 10% easier.

Rating: 3

This might be interesting if it gave 30% or more. Even then, you'd 
have to play a "stealthy" character to make use of the bonus, which 
would be fun, but not really powerful. As is, the effect of this
talent is negligible.
-------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------
                          *** SUMMARY ***
Here's a list of useful or potentially useful talents. Basically,
anything that got a rating of 6 or above. Entries in brackets are
only worthwhile as prerequisites.

Note that not all prerequisite relationships are shown, due to 
limitations of ASCII and because many relationships are cross-
boundary; for example, a Defensive Talent might be a prerequisite
for a Melee Talent.

STARTING TALENTS
  Strong
  (Strong of Will)

  (Charming) -> (Boon to the Family) -> Heir

  (Alert) -> 3 Missile Affinities -> Missile Weapon Master
          -> (Miser)              -> Treasure Hunter

MELEE TALENTS
  Brawler
  Ambidextrous

  Affinity (any) -> Melee Weapons Master

  (Aggressive) -> Natural Berserker

  (Basher) -> Powerful Strike -> Mighty Strike

MISSILE AND THROWN WEAPON TALENTS
  Strong Thrower

  Quick Shot -> Lightning Shot

  (Good Shot)     -> Eagle-Eyed
                  -> Keen Shot  -|        
  Affinity (any)  ->             |-> Missile Weapon Master

DEFENSIVE TALENTS
  (Shield Specialist) -> (Shield Expert) -> Shield Master

  (Careful) -> Very Careful
            -> Defensive Fighter -> Dodger

  (Hardy) -> Very Hardy   -> Extremely Hardy
          -> (Tough Skin)
                -> (Iron Skin) 
                       -> Steel Skin -> Mithril Skin

MAGICAL TALENTS
  (Potent Aura) -> Strong Healer
                -> Strong Magic
                -> Charged
                -> (Strong Aura) -> (Mighty Aura)   
                                 -> Good Book Caster
                                        -> Great Book
                                             Caster

MISCELLANEOUS TALENTS
  Long Stride
  Sixth Sense
  Healthy

  Quick -> Very Quick -> Greased Lightning

  (Porter) -> Master Packager -> Beast of Burden


0.14.17 The final score

The exact algorithm presented here may be out of date. At one point, 
the final score was calculated as follows:

score = sum of all skill scores / 20 +
        spell memory [the first number] for each known spell / 5 + 50 +
        MIN(piety - 200, 10000000) +
        (level - 1) * 50 +
        experience / 10 +
        (sum of the danger ratings [1-50] of explored levels) * 30 +
        MIN(value of all items on body / 50, 20000000) +
        (# identified items * 100) +
        various amounts for having intrinsics (between 200 and 10000 each) +
        ~2000 (retrieving the cute puppy) +
        20000 (making Blup happy) +
        (sum of attribute modifications * 200) +
        (# of successful dwarven quests * 5000) +
        5000 (if member of thieves guild) +
        5000 (if head of thieves guild) +
        1000 (adhering to the principles of the Cat Lord)
        250000 (saving Khelavaster) +
        2000000 (being a paragon of order) +
        MAX(0, 300 - max. hitpoints) * 1000 (only if the game was completed) +
        20000 (no divine interventions and game complete) +
        20000 (champion) +
        -10000 (fallen champion) +
        -(chaos score * 5) (typical about 1000 points score per corruption)


This score is doubled if you managed to solve the major goal of the game.

If you managed to solve the game _and_ leave the Drakalor Chain the following is added to 
that score:

        MAX(0, moves - 50000) * 100

Then the score is once more doubled.
